(UE TUTTE
 

Framing and Context
of the Report

Coordinating Lead Authors:
Nerilie Abram (Australia), Jean-Pierre Gattuso (France), Anjal Prakash (Nepal/India)

Lead Authors:

Lijing Cheng (China), Maria Paz Chidichimo (Argentina), Susan Crate (USA), Hiroyuki Enomoto
(Japan), Matthias Garschagen (Germany), Nicolas Gruber (Switzerland), Sherilee Harper
(Canada), Elisabeth Holland (Fiji), Raphael Martin Kudela (USA), Jake Rice (Canada),
Konrad Steffen (Switzerland), Karina von Schuckmann (France)

Contributing Authors:

Nathaniel Bindoff (Australia), Sinead Collins (UK), Rebecca Colvin (Australia), Daniel Farinotti
(Switzerland), Nathalie Hilmi (France/Monaco), Jochen Hinkel (Germany), Regine Hock (USA),
Alexandre Magnan (France), Michael Meredith (UK), Avash Pandey (Nepal), Mandira Singh
Shrestha (Nepal), Anna Sinisalo (Nepal/Finland), Catherine Sutherland (South Africa),
Phillip Williamson (UK)

Review Editors:
Monika Rhein (Germany), David Schoeman (Australia)

Chapter Scientists:
Avash Pandey (Nepal), Bethany Ellis (Australia)

This chapter should be cited as:

Abram, N, J.-P. Gattuso, A. Prakash, L. Cheng, M.P. Chidichimo, S. Crate, H. Enomoto, M. Garschagen, N. Gruber,
S. Harper, E. Holland, R.M. Kudela, J. Rice, K. Steffen, and K. von Schuckmann, 2019: Framing and Context of the
Report, In: {PCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate [H.-0. Pôrtner, D.C. Roberts,
V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhaï, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegria, M. Nicolai A. Okem, I. Petzold,
B. Rama, N.M. Weyer (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY USA, pp. 73-129.
htips:/doiorg/10.1017/9781009157964.003.

73
 

Chapter 1

Table of contents

Executive Summary 75
1.1 Why this Special Report? 77
Box 1.1: Major Components and
Characteristics of the Ocean and Cryosphere 78

1.2 Role of the Ocean and Cryosphere

in the Earth System 80
1.2.1 Ocean and Cryosphere in Earth's Energy,
Water and Biogeochemical Cycles 80
1.2.2 Interactions Between the Ocean
and Cryosphere 80
1.3 Time Scales, Thresholds and Detection
of Ocean and Cryosphere Change 81
1.4 Changes in the Ocean and Cryosphere 83
1.4.1  Observed and Projected Changes
in the Ocean 83
1.4.2  Observed and Projected Changes
in the Cryosphere 84

Cross-Chapter Box 1: Scenarios,
Pathways and Reference Periods 84

1.5 Risk and Impacts Related to Ocean
and Cryosphere Change 87

Cross-Chapter Box 2: Key Concepts of Risk,
Adaptation, Resilience and Transformation 87

Hazards and Opportunities for Natural

Systems, Ecosystems, and Human Systems 90
1.5.2  Exposure of Natural Systems, Ecosystems,

and Human Systems 91
1.5.3 Vulnerabilities in Natural Systems,

Ecosystems, and Human Systems 92

1.6 Addressing the Causes and Consequences of
Climate Change for the Ocean and Cryosphere 92

1.6.1  Mitigation and Adaptation Options

in the Ocean and Cryosphere 92
1.6.2 Adaptation in Natural Systems, Ecosystems,
and Human Systems 94

74

Framing and Context of the Report

1.7 Governance and Institutions 95

Cross-Chapter Box 3: Governance of the Ocean,
Coasts and the Cryosphere under Climate Change 95

1.8 Knowledge Systems for Understanding

and Responding to Change 99
1.8.1 Scientific Knowledge 99
1.8.2 Indigenous Knowledge and Local Knowledge … 102
1.8.3 The Role of Knowledge in People's
Responses to Climate, Ocean and
Cryosphere Change 102
Cross-Chapter Box 4: Indigenous
Knowledge and Local Knowledge
in Ocean and Cryosphere Change 103
1.9 Approaches Taken in this Special Report 106
1.9.1  Methodologies Relevant to this Report 106
1.9.2 Communication of Confidence
in Assessment Findings 106
Cross-Chapter Box 5: Confidence
and Deep Uncertainty 107
1.10 Integrated Storyline of this Special Report 110
References 116
Frequently Asked Questions 112

FAQ 1.1 How do changes in the ocean
and cryosphere affect our life

on planet Earth?

How will changes in the ocean
and cryosphere affect meeting the
Sustainable Development Goals? 114

 

FAQ 1.2
Framing and Context of the Report

Executive Summary

This special report assesses new knowledge since the IPCC 5th
Assessment Report (AR5) and the Special Report on Global Warming
of 1.5°C (SR15) on how the ocean and cryosphere have and are
expected to change with ongoing global warming, the risks and
opportunities these changes bring to ecosystems and people,
and mitigation, adaptation and governance options for reducing
future risks. Chapter 1 provides context on the importance of the
ocean and cryosphere, and the framework for the assessments in
subsequent chapters of the report.

AIl people on Earth depend directly or indirectly on the
ocean and cryosphere. The fundamental roles of the ocean and
cryosphere in the Earth system include the uptake and redistribution
of anthropogenic carbon dioxide and heat by the ocean, as well as
their crucial involvement of in the hydrological cycle. The cryosphere
also amplifies climate changes through snow, ice and permafrost
feedbacks. Services provided to people by the ocean and/or
cryosphere include food and freshwater, renewable energy, health
and wellbeing, cultural values, trade and transport. {1.1, 1.2, 1.5}

Sustainable development is at risk from emerging and
intensifying ocean and cryosphere changes. Ocean and
cryosphere changes interact with each of the United Nations
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Progress on climate action
(SDG 13) would reduce risks to aspects of sustainable development
that are fundamentally linked to the ocean and cryosphere and
the services they provide (high confidence’). Progress on achievingthe
SDGs can contribute to reducing the exposure or vulnerabilities of
people and communities to the risks of ocean and cryosphere change
(medium confidence). {1.1}

Communities living in close connection with polar, mountain,
and coastal environments are particularly exposed to the
current and future hazards of ocean and cryosphere change.
Coasts are home to approximately 28% of the global population,
induding around 11% living on land less than 10 m above sea level.
Almost 10% of the global population lives in the Arctic or high
mountain regions. People in these regions face the greatest exposure
to ocean and cryosphere change, and poor and marginalised people
here are particularly vulnerable to climate-related hazards and risks
(very high confidence). The adaptive capacity of people, communities
and nations is shaped by social, political, cultural, economic,
technological, institutional, geographical and demographic factors.
1.1, 1.5, 1.6, Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1}

 

Chapter 1

Ocean and cryosphere changes are pervasive and observed
from high mountains, to the polar regions, to coasts, and into
the deep ocean. AR5 assessed that the ocean is warming (0 to
700 m: virtually certain2; 700 to 2,000 m: likely), sea level is rising
(high confidence), and ocean acdidity is increasing (high confidence).
Most glaciers are shrinking (high confidence), the Greenland and
Antarcticice sheets are losing mass (high confidence), sea ice extent in
the Arctic is decreasing (very high confidence), Northern Hemisphere
snow cover is decreasing (very high confidence), and permafrost
temperatures are increasing (high confidence). Improvements
since AR5 in observation systems, techniques, reconstructions and
model developments, have advanced scientific characterisation
and understanding of ocean and cryosphere change, including in
previously identified areas of concern such as ice sheets and Atlantic
Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC). {1.1, 1.4, 1.8.1}

Evidence and understanding of the human causes of climate
warming, and of associated ocean and cryosphere changes,
has increased over the past 30 years of IPCC assessments (very
high confidence). Human activities are estimated to have caused
approximately 1.0°C of global warming above pre-industrial levels
(SR15). Areas of concern in earlier IPCC reports, such as the expected
acceleration of sea level rise, are now observed (high confidence).
Evidence for expected slow-down of AMOC is emerging in sustained
observations and from long-term palaeodimate reconstructions
(medium confidence), and may be related with anthropogenic forcing
according to model simulations, although this remains to be properly
attributed. Significant sea level rise contributions from Antarctic ice
sheet mass loss (very high confidence), which earlier reports did not
expect to manifest this century, are already being observed. {1.1, 1.4}

Ocean and cryosphere changes and risks by the end-of-century
(2081-2100) will be larger under high greenhouse gas emission
scenarios, compared with low emission scenarios (very high
confidence). Projections and assessments of future climate, ocean
and cryosphere changes in the Special Report on the Ocean and
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC) are commonly based
on coordinated climate model experiments from the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) forced with Representative
Concentration Pathways (RCPs) of future radiative forcing. Current
emissions continue to grow at a rate consistent with a high emission
future without effective climate change mitigation policies (referred
to as RCP8.5). The SROCC assessment contrasts this high greenhouse
gas emission future with a low greenhouse gas emission, high
mitigation future (referred to as RCP2.6) that gives a two in three
chance of limiting warming by the end of the century to less than 2°C
above pre-industrial. {Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1}

In this report, the following summary terms are used to describe the available evidence: limited, medium, or robust; and for the degree of agreement: low, medium or

high. À level of confidence is expressed using five qualifiers: very low, low, medium, high and very high, and typeset in italics, for example, medium confidence. For a given
evidence and agreement statement, different confidence levels can be assigned, but increasing levels of evidence and degrees of agreement are correlated with increasing

confidence (see Section 1.9.2 and Figure 1.4 for more details).

2 Inthis report, the following terms have been used to indicate the assessed likelihood of an outcome or a result: Virtual certain 99—100% probability, Very likely 90—100%,
Likely 66—-100%, About as likely as not 33-66%, Unlikely 033%, Very unlikely 0—10%, and Exceptionally unlikely 0—1%. Additional terms (Extremely likely: 95—100%,
More likely than not >50—100%, and Extremely unlikely 0—5%) may also be used when appropriate Assessed likelihood is typeset in italics, for example, very likely
{see Section 1.9.2 and Figure 1.4 for more details). This Report also uses the term ‘likely range’ to indicate that the assessed likelihood of an outcome lies within the

17-83% probability range.

75

 
 

Chapter 1

Characteristics of ocean and cryosphere change include
thresholds of abrupt change, long-term changes that cannot be
avoided, and irreversibility (high confidence). Ocean warming,
acidification and deoxygenation, ice sheet and glacier mass loss, and
permafrost degradation are expected to be irreversible on time scales
relevant to human societies and ecosystems. Long response times
of decades to millennia mean that the ocean and cryosphere are
committed to long-term change even after atmospheric greenhouse
gas concentrations and radiative forcing stabilise (high confidence).
Ice-melt or the thawing of permafrost involve thresholds (state
changes) that allow for abrupt, nonlinear responses to ongoing
climate warming (high confidence). These characteristics of ocean
and cryosphere change pose risks and challenges to adaptation.
{1.1, Box 1.1, 1.3}

Societies will be exposed, and challenged to adapt, to changes
in the ocean and cryosphere even if current and future efforts
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions keep global warming well
below 2°C (very high confidence). Ocean and cryosphere-related
mitigation and adaptation measures indude options that address
the causes of climate change, support biological and ecological
adaptation, or enhance societal adaptation. Most ocean-based local
mitigation and adaptation measures have limited effectiveness to
mitigate dimate change and reduce its consequences at the global
scale, but are useful to implement because they address local risks,
often have co-benefits such as biodiversity conservation, and have
few adverse side effects. Effective mitigation at a global scale
will reduce the need and cost of adaptation, and reduce the risks
of surpassing limits to adaptation. Ocean-based carbon dioxide
removal at the global scale has potentially large negative ecosystem
consequences. {1.6.1, 1.6.2, Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1}

The scale and cross-boundary dimensions of changes in the
ocean and cryosphere challenge the ability of communities,
cultures and nations to respond effectively within existing
governance frameworks (high confidence). Profound
economic and institutional transformations are needed
if climate-resilient development is to be achieved (high
confidence). Changes in the ocean and cryosphere, the ecosystem
services that they provide, the drivers of those changes, and the risks
to marine, coastal, polar and mountain ecosystems, occur on spatial
and temporal scales that may not align within existing governance
structures and practices (medium confidence). This report highlights
the requirements for transformative governance, international and
transboundary cooperation, and greater empowerment of local
communities in the governance of the ocean, coasts, and cryosphere
in a changing climate. {1.5, 1.7, Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1,
Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1}

76

Framing and Context of the Report

Robust assessments of ocean and cryosphere change, and the
development of context-specific governance and response
options, depend on utilising and strengthening all available
knowledge systems (high confidence). Scientific knowledge from
observations, models and syntheses provides global to local scale
understandings of climate change (very high confidence). Indigenous
knowledge (IK) and local knowledge (LK) provide context-specific and
socio-culturally relevant understandings for effective responses and
policies (medium confidence). Education and climate literacy enable
climate action and adaptation (high confidence). {1.8, Cross-Chapter
Box 4 in Chapter 1}

Long-term sustained observations and continued modelling
are critical for detecting, understanding and predicting ocean
and cryosphere change, providing the knowledge to inform
risk assessments and adaptation planning (high confidence).
Knowledge gaps exist in scientific knowledge for important regions,
parameters and processes of ocean and cryosphere change, induding
for physically plausible, high impact changes like high end sea level
rise scenarios that would be costly if realised without effective
adaptation planning and even then may exceed limits to adaptation.
Means such as expert judgement, scenario building, and invoking
multiple lines of evidence enable comprehensive risk assessments
even in cases of uncertain future ocean and cryosphere changes.
{1.8.1, 1.9.2; Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1}
Framing and Context of the Report

1.1 Why this Special Report?

All people depend directly or indirectly on the ocean and cryosphere
(see FAQ1.1). Coasts are the most densely populated areas on Earth.
As of 2010, 28% of the global population (1.9 billion people) were
living in areas less than 100 km from the coastline and less than
100 m above sea level, including 17 major cities which are each home
to more than 5 million people (Kummu et al, 2016). Small Island
Developing States are together home to around 65 million people
(UN, 2015a). The low elevation coastal zone (land less than 10 m
above sea level), where people and infrastructure are most exposed
to coastal hazards, is currently home to around 11% of the global
population (around 680 million people), and by 2050 the population
in this zone is projected to grow to more than one billion under all
Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) (Section 4.3.3.2; Merkens
et al, 2016; O'Neill et al., 2017). In 2010, approximately 4 million
people lived in the Arctic (Section 3.5.1), and an increase of only
4% is projected for 2030 (Heleniak, 2014) compared to 16-23%
for the global population increase (O'Neill et al., 2017). Almost 10%
of the global population (around 670 million people) lived in high
mountain regions in 2010, and by 2050 the population in these
regions is expected to grow to between 736-844 million across the
SSPs (Section 2.1). For people living in close contact with the ocean
and cryosphere, these systems provide essential livelihoods, food
security, well-being and cultural identity, but are also a source of
hazards (Sections 1.5.1, 1.5.2).

Even people living far from the ocean or cryosphere depend on these
systems. Snow and glacier melt from high mountains helps to sustain
the rivers that deliver water resources to downstream populations
{Kaser et al., 2010; Sharma et al., 2019). In the Indus and Ganges river
basins, for example, snow and glacier melt provides enough water to
grow food crops to sustain a balanced diet for 38 million people, and
supports the livelihoods of 129 million farmers (Biemans et al. 2019).
The ocean and cryosphere regulate global climate and weather; the
ocean is the primary source of rain and snowfall needed to sustain
life on land, and uptake of heat and carbon into the ocean has so
far limited the magnitude of anthropogenic warming experienced at
the Earth's surface (Section 1.2). The ocean's biosphere is responsible
for about half of the primary production on Earth, and around 17%
of the non-grain protein in human diets is derived from the ocean
(FAO, 2018). Communities far from the coast can also be exposed
to changes in the ocean through extreme weather events. Ocean
and cryosphere changes can result in differing consequences and
benefits on local to global scales; for example, declining sea ice in
the Arctic is allowing access to shorter international shipping routes
but restricting traditional sea ice based travel for Arctic communities.

Human activities are estimated to have so far caused approximately
1°C of global warming (0.8°C—1.2°C likely range; above pre-industrial
levels; IPCC, 2018). The IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5)
concluded that, ‘Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, and
since the 19505, many of the observed changes are unprecedented
over decades to millennia. The atmosphere and ocean have warmed,
the amounts of snow and ice have diminished, sea level has risen,
and the concentrations of greenhouse gases have increased” (IPCC,
2013). Subsequently, Parties to the Paris Agreement aimed to

Chapter 1

strengthen the global response to the threats of climate change,
including by ‘holding the increase in global average temperature
to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to
limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C' (UNFCCC, 2015).

Pervasive ocean and cryosphere changes that are already being
caused by human-induced climate change are observed from high
mountains, to the polar regions, to coasts and into the deep reaches
of the ocean. Changes by the end of this century are expected to
be larger under high greenhouse gas emission futures compared
with low-emission futures (Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1), and
inaction on reducing emissions will have large economic costs.
If human impacts on the ocean continue unabated, declines in
ocean health and services are projected to cost the global economy
428 billion USD yr! by 2050, and 1.979 trillion USD yr-! by 2100.
Alternatively, steps to reduce these impacts could save more than
a trillion dollars USD yr-! by 2100 (Ackerman, 2013). Similarly, sea
level rise scenarios of 25 to 123 cm by 2100 without adaptation
are expected to see 0.2-4.6% of the global population impacted by
coastal flooding annually, with average annual losses amounting
to 0.3-9.3% of global GDP. Investment in adaptation reduces by 2 to
3 orders of magnitude the number of people flooded and the losses
caused (Hinkel et al., 2014).

The United Nations 2030 SDGs (UN, 2015b) are all connected
to varying extents with the ocean and cryosphere (see FAQ1.2).
Climate action (SDG 13) would limit future ocean and cryosphere
changes (high confidence; Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1,
Figure 1.5, Chapter 2 to 6), and would reduce risks to SDGs that
are fundamentally linked to the ocean and cryosphere, including life
below water, and clean water and sanitation. (Sections 2.4, 4.4, 5.4;
Szabo et al, 2016; LeBlanc et al., 2017; Singh et al., 2018; Visbeck,
2018; Wymann von Dach et al, 2018; Kulonen, Accepted). Other
goals for sustainable development depend on the services the ocean
and cryosphere provide or are impacted by ocean and cryosphere
change; including, life on land, health and wellbeing, eradicating
poverty and hunger, economic growth, clean energy, infrastructure,
and sustainable cities and communities. Progress on the other
SDGs (education, gender equality, reduced inequalities, responsible
consumption, strong institutions, and partnerships for the goals) are
important for reducing the vulnerability of people and communities
to the risks of ocean and cryosphere changes (Section 1.5; 2.3), and
for supporting mitigation and adaptation responses (Sections 1.6, 1.7
and 1.8.3; medium confidence).

The characteristics of ocean and cryosphere change (Section 1.3)
present particular challenges to climate-resilient development
pathways (CRDPs). Ocean acidification and deoxygenation, ice sheet
and glacier mass loss, and permafrost degradation are expected to be
irreversible on time scales relevant to human societies and ecosystems
(Lenton et al., 2008; Solomon et al., 2009; Frôlicher and Joos, 2010;
Cai et al., 2016; Kopp et al., 2016). Ocean and cryosphere changes
also have the potential to worsen anthropogenic climate change,
globally and regionally; for example, by additional greenhouse gas
emissions released through permafrost thaw that would intensify
anthropogenic climate change globally, or by increasing the
absorption of solar radiation through snow and ice loss in the Arctic

77

 
 

Chapter 1

that is causing regional climate to warm at more than twice the
global rate (AMAP 2017; Steffen et al., 2018). Ocean and cryosphere
changes place particular pressures on the adaptive capacities of
cultures who maintain centuries to millennia-old relationships to
the planet's polar, mountain, and coastal environments, as well as
on cities, states and nations whose territorial boundaries are being
transformed by ongoing sea level rise (Gerrard and Wannier, 2013).
The scale and cross-boundary dimensions of changes in the ocean
and cryosphere challenge the ability of current local, regional and
international governance structures to respond (Section 1.7).
Profound economic and institutional transformations are needed if
climate-resilient development is to be achieved, including ambitious
mitigation efforts to avoid the risks of large-scale and abrupt ocean
and cryosphere changes.

Framing and Context of the Report

to change in a warming climate. SROCC assesses new knowledge
since ARS and provides an integrated approach across IPCC working
groups | and Il, linking physical changes with their ecological and
human impacts, and the strategies to respond and adapt to future
risks. It is one of three special reports being produced by the IPCC
during its Sixth Assessment Cycle (in addition to the three working
groups’ main assessment reports). The concurrent IPCC Special
Report on Climate Change and Land (released August 2019) links to
SROCC where terrestrial environments and their habitability interact
closely with the ocean or cryosphere, such as in mountain, Arctic,
and coastal regions. SR15 concluded that human-induced warming
will reach 1.5°C between 2030-2052 if it continues to increase at
the current rate (high confidence), and that there are widespread
benefits to human and natural systems of limiting warming to 1.5°C

compared with 2°C or more (high confidence; IPCC, 2018).
The commissioning of this IPCC special report recognises the
interconnected ways in which the ocean and cryosphere are expected

Box 1.1 | Major Components and Characteristics of the Ocean and Cryosphere

Ocean

The global ocean is the interconnected body of saline water that encompasses polar to equatorial climate zones and covers 71% ofthe
Earth surface. It includes the Arctic, Pacific, Atlantic, Indian and Southern Oceans, as well as their marginal seas. The ocean contains
about 97% of the Earth's water, supplies 99% of the Earth's biologically habitable space, and provides roughly half of the primary
production on Earth.

Coasts are where ocean and land processes interact, and indudes coastal cities, deltas, estuaries, and other coastal ecosystems
such as mangrove forests. Low elevation coastal zones (less than 10 m above sea level) are densely populated and particularly exposed
to hazards from the ocean (Chapters 4 to 6, Cross-Chapter Box 9). Moving into the ocean, the continental shelf represents the shallow
ocean areas (depth <200 m) that surround continents and islands, before the seafloor descends at the continental slope into the deep
ocean. The edge of the continental shelf is often used to identify the coastal ocean from the open ocean. Ocean depth and distance from
the coast may influence the governance and economic access that applies to ocean areas (Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1).

The average depth of the global ocean is about 3,700 m, with a maximum depth of more than 10,000 m. The ocean is vertically
stratified with less dense water sitting above more dense layers, determined by the seawater temperature, salinity and pressure. The
surface of the ocean is in direct contact with the atmosphere, except for sea ice covered regions. Sunlight penetrates the water column
and supports primary production (by phytoplankton) down to 50-200 m depth (epipelagic zone). Atmospheric-driven mixing occurs
from the sea surface and into the mesopelagic zone (200-1,000 m). The distinction between the upper ocean and deep ocean depends
on the processes being considered.

The ocean is a fundamental climate regulator on seasonal to millennial time scales. Seawater has a heat capacity four times larger
than air and holds vast quantities of dissolved carbon. Heat, water, and biogeochemically relevant gases (e.g., O2 and CO) exchange
at the air-sea interface, and ocean currents and mixing caused by winds, tides, wave dynamics, density differences and turbulence
redistribute these throughout the global ocean (Box 1.1, Figure 1).

Cryosphere

The cryosphere refers to frozen components of the Earth system that are at or below the land and ocean surface. These include snow,
glaciers, ice sheets, ice shelves, icebergs, sea ice, lake ice, river ice, permafrost and seasonally frozen ground. Cryosphere is widespread
in polar regions (Chapter 3) and high mountains (Chapter 2), and changes in the cryosphere can have far-reaching and even global
impacts (Chapters 2 to 6, Cross-Chapter Box 9).

Snow is common in polar and mountain regions. lt can ultimately either melt seasonally or transform into ice layers that build glaciers
and ice sheets. Snow feeds groundwater and river runoff together with glacier melt causes natural hazards (avalanches, rain-on-snow
flood events) and is a critical economic resource for hydropower and tourism. Snow plays a major role in maintaining high mountain
and Arctic ecosystems, affects the Earth's energy budget by reflecting solar radiation (albedo effect), and influences the temperature
of underlying permafrost.

78
Framing and Context of the Report Chapter 1

Box 1.1 (continued)

Ice sheets and glaciers are land-based ice, built up by accumulating snowfall on their surface. Presently, around 10% of Earth's
land area is covered by glaciers or ice sheets, which in total hold about 69% of Earth's freshwater (Gleick, 1996). Ice sheets and
glaciers flow, and at their margins ice and/or melt water is discharged into lakes, rivers or the ocean. The largest ice bodies on Earth
are the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets. Marine-based sections of ice sheets (e.g., West Antarctic Ice Sheet) sit upon bedrock that
largely lies below sea level and are in contact with ocean heat, making them vulnerable to rapid and irreversible ice loss. Ice sheets
and glaciers that lose more ice than they accumulate contribute to global sea level rise.

 

Ice shelves are extensions of ice sheets and glaciers that float in the surrounding ocean. The transition between the grounded part of
an ice sheet and a floating ice shelf is called the grounding line. Changes in ice shelf size do not directly contribute to sea level rise,
but buttressing of ice shelves restrict the flow of land-based ice past the grounding line into the ocean.

Sea ice forms from freezing of seawater, and sea ice on the ocean surface is further thickened by snow accumulation. Sea ice may be
discontinuous pieces moved on the ocean surface by wind and currents (pack ice), or a motionless sheet attached to the coast or to ice
shelves (fast ice). Sea ice provides many critical functions: it provides essential habitat for polar species and supports the livelihoods
of people in the Arctic (including Indigenous peoples); regulates climate by reflecting solar radiation; inhibits ocean-atmosphere
exchange of heat, momentum and gases (including CO2); supports global deep ocean circulation via dense (cold and salty) water
formation; and aids or hinders transportation and travel routes in the polar regions.

Permafrost is ground (soil or rock containing ice and frozen organic material) that remains at or below 0°C for at least two consecutive
years. lt occurs on land in polar and high mountain areas, and also as submarine permafrost in shallow parts of the Arctic and Southern
Oceans. Permafrost thickness ranges from less than 1 m to greater than 1,000 m. It usually occurs beneath an active layer which thaws
and freezes annually. Unlike glaciers and snow, the spatial distribution and temporal changes of permafrost cannot easily be observed.
Permafrost thaw can cause hazards, induding ground subsidence or landslides, and influence global climate through emissions of
greenhouse gases from microbial breakdown of previously frozen organic carbon.

Ice sheet mass
Glacier mass Water (Greenland & Antarctica)

Heat
Snow cover Cri Carbon dioxide
Oh

   
   
 
    
     
  
 
 
 

Sea ice
(Arctic)

a

re \ 00 T Ice sheet
_ Seaice Ho ds AN Sea ice =

 
 
  
 

   

Marine

VV Y heatwaves Sea level LL AA:

er Ice shelf

   
   

Permafrost e
LOUE >; CL ALL LES les

CHE ET
ru
a ' ” 1)
OA CE CL CN Continental slope

Ocean heat content Ocean pH Co (TC)
l
(er Changes

« ss.
ununnnnnmmnnseusss”
Ocean circulation

LTÉE [FEU

0
ll
l
0
C'TTESES |
l
ll
l
l

+ ECS EC

Box 1.1, Figure 1 | Schematic illustration of key components and changes of the ocean and cryosphere, and their linkages in the Earth system through the movement
of heat, water, and carbon dioxide (Section 1.2). Climate change-related effects in the ocean include sea level rise, increasing ocean heat content and marine heat
waves, ocean deoxygenation, and ocean adidification (Section 1.4.1). Changes in the cryosphere include the decline of Arctic sea ice extent, Antarctic and Greenland
ice sheet mass loss, glacier mass loss, permafrost thaw and decreasing snow cover extent (Section 1.4.2), For illustration purposes, a few examples of where humans
directly interact with ocean and cryosphere are shown.

19
 

Chapter 1

1.2 Role of the Ocean and Cryosphere
in the Earth System
1.2.1 Ocean and Cryosphere in Earth's

Energy, Water and Biogeochemical Cycles

The ocean and cryosphere play a key role in the Earth system.
Powered by the Sun's energy, large quantities of energy, water and
biogeochemical elements (predominantly carbon, nitrogen, oxygen
and hydrogen) are exchanged between all components of the Earth
system, including between the ocean and cryosphere (Box 1.1,
Figure 1).

During an equilibrium (stable) climate state, the amount of incoming
solar energy is balanced by an equal amount of outgoing radiation
at the top of Earth's atmosphere (Hansen et al., 2011). At the Earth's
surface energy from the Sun is transformed into various forms (heat,
potential, latent, kinetic, and chemical), that drive weather systems
in the atmosphere and currents in the ocean, fuel photosynthesis
on land and in the ocean, and fundamentally determine the climate
(Trenberth et al, 2014). The ocean has a large capacity to store
and release heat, and the Earth's energy budget can be effectively
monitored through the heat content of the ocean on time scales
longer than one year (Palmer and McNeall, 2014; von Schuckmann
et al. 2016; Cheng et al, 2018). The large heat capacity of the ocean
leads to different characteristics of the ocean response to external
forcings compared with the atmosphere (Sections 1.3, 1.4). The
reflective properties of snow and ice also play an important role in
regulating climate via the albedo effect. Increased amounts of solar
energy are absorbed when snow or ice are replaced by less reflective
land or ocean surfaces, resulting in a climate change feedback
responsible for amplified changes.

Water is exchanged between the ocean, atmosphere, land and
cryosphere as part of the hydrological cycle driven by solar heating
(Box 1.1, Figure 1; Trenberth et al., 2007; Lagerloef et al., 2010; Durack
et al. 2016). Evaporation from the surface ocean is the main source of
water in the atmosphere, which is moved back to the Earth's surface
as precipitation (Gimeno et al. 2012). The hydrological cycle is closed
by the eventual return of water to the ocean by rivers, streams, and
groundwater flow, and through ice discharge and melting of ice
sheets and glaciers (Yu, 2018). Hydrological extremes related to
the ocean indude floods from extreme rainfall (induding tropical
cyclones) or ocean circulation-related droughts (Sections 6.3, 6.5),
while cryosphere-related flooding can be caused by rapid snow melt
and melt water discharge events (Sections 2.3, 3.4).

Ninety-two percent of the carbon on Earth that is not locked up
in geological reservoirs (e.g., in sedimentary rocks or coal, oil and
gas reservoirs) resides in the ocean (Sarmiento and Gruber, 2002).
Most of this is in the form of dissolved inorganic carbon, some of
which readily exchanges with CO in the overlying atmosphere. This
represents a major control on atmospheric CO2 and makes the ocean
and its carbon cycle one of the most important climate regulators in
the Earth system, especially on time scales of a few hundred years
and more (Sigman and Boyle, 2000; Berner and Kothavala, 2001). The
ocean also contains as much organic carbon (mostly in the form of

80

Framing and Context of the Report

dissolved organic matter) as the total vegetation on land (Jiao et al.
2010; Hansell, 2013). Primary production in the ocean, which is as
large as that on land (Field et al., 1998), fuels complex food-webs
that provide essential food for people.

Ocean circulation and mixing redistribute heat and carbon over
large distances and depths (Delworth et al., 2017). The ocean moves
heat laterally from the tropics towards polar regions (Rhines et al.
2008). Vertical redistribution of heat and carbon occurs where warm,
low-density surface ocean waters transform into cool high-density
waters that sink to deeper layers of the ocean (Talley, 2013), taking
high carbon concentrations with them (Gruber et al, 2019). Driven
by winds, ocean circulation also brings cold water up from deep
layers (upwelling) in some regions, allowing heat, oxygen and carbon
exchange between the deep ocean and the atmosphere (Oschlies
et al, 2018; Shi et al., 2018) and fuelling biological production
(Sarmiento and Gruber, 2006).

1.2.2 Interactions Between the Ocean and Cryosphere
The ocean and cryosphere are interconnected in a multitude of ways
(Box 1.1, Figure 1). Evaporation from the ocean provides snowfall
that builds and sustains the ice sheets and glaciers that store large
amounts of frozen water on land (Section 4.2.1). The vast ice sheets
in Antarctica and Greenland currently hold about 66 m of potential
global sea level rise (Fretwell et al., 2013), although the loss of a large
fraction of this potential would require millennia of ice sheet retreat.
Ocean temperature and sea level affect ice sheet, glacier and ice shelf
stability in places where the base of ice bodies are in direct contact
with ocean water (Section 3.3.1). The nonlinear response of ice-melt
to ocean temperature changes means that even slight increases in
ocean temperature have the potential to rapidly melt and destabilise
large sections of an ice sheet or ice shelf (Section 3.3.1.5).

The formation of sea ice leads to the production of dense ocean
water that contributes to the deep ocean circulation (Section 3.3.3.2).
Paleocimate evidence and modelling indicates that releases of large
amounts of glacier and ice sheet melt water into the surface ocean
can disrupt deep overturning circulation of the ocean, causing global
climate impacts (Knutti et al., 2004; Golledge et al., 2019). Ice sheet
melt water in the Antarctic may cause changes in surface ocean
salinity, stratification and circulation, that feedback to generate
further ocean-driven melting of marine-based ice sheets (Golledge
et al, 2019) and promote sea ice formation (Purich et al., 2018).
The cryosphere and ocean further link through the movement of
biogeochemical nutrients. For example, iron accumulated in sea ice
during winter is released to the ocean during the spring and summer
melt, helping to fuel ocean productivity in the seasonal sea ice zone
(Tagliabue et al., 2017). Nutrient rich sediments delivered by glaciers
further connect cryosphere processes to ocean productivity (Arrigo
et al., 2017).
Framing and Context of the Report

1.3 Time Scales, Thresholds and Detection

of Ocean and Cryosphere Change

It takes hundreds of years to millennia for the entire deep ocean
to turn over (Matsumoto, 2007; Gebbie and Huybers, 2012), while
renewal of the large ice sheets requires many thousands of years
(Huybrechts and de Wolde, 1999). Long response times mean that
the deep ocean and the large ice sheets tend to lag behind in their
response to the rapidly changing climate at Earth's surface, and that
they will continue to change even after radiative forcing stabilises
(e.g., Golledge et al., 2015; Figure 1.1a). Such ‘committed' changes
mean that some ocean and cryosphere changes are essentially
irreversible on time scales relevant to human societies (decades to
centuries), even in the presence of immediate action to limit further
global warming (e.g., Section 4.2.3.5).

While some aspects of the ocean and cryosphere might respond
in a linear (ie, directly proportional) manner to a perturbation
by some external forcing, this may change fundamentally when
critical thresholds are reached. A very important example for such a
threshold is the transition from frozen water to liquid water at around
O°C that can lead to rapid acceleration of ice-melt or permafrost
thaw (e.g., Abram et al, 2013; Trusel et al., 2018). Such thresholds
often act as tipping points, as they are associated with rapid and
abrupt changes even when the underlying forcing changes gradually
(Figure 1.1a, 1.10). Tipping elements include, for example, the collapse
of the ocean's large-scale overturning circulation in the Atlantic
(Section 6.7), or the collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet though
a process called marine ice sheet instability (Cross-Chapter Box 8
in Chapter 3; Lenton et al, 2008). Potential ocean and cryosphere
tipping elements form part of the scientific case for efforts to limit
climate warming to well below 2°C (IPCC, 2018).

Anthropogenically forced change occurs against a backdrop of
substantial natural variability (Figure 1.1b). The anthropogenic signal
is already detectable in global surface air temperature and several
other climate variables, induding ocean temperature and salinity
{IPCC, 2014), but short observational records and large year-to-
year variability mean that formal detection is not yet the case for
many expected ocean and cryosphere changes (Jones et al., 2016).
‘Time of Emergence’ refers to the time when anthropogenic change
signals emerge from the background noise of natural variability in a
pre-defined reference period Hawkins and Sutton, 2012; (Figure 1.1b:;
Section 5.2, Box 5.1). For some variables, (e.g., for those associated
with ocean acidification), the current signals emerge from this natural
variability within a few decades, whereas for others, such as primary
production and expected Antarctic-wide sea ice decline, the signal
may not emerge for many more decades even under high emission
scenarios (Collins et al., 2013; Keller et al., 2014; Rodgers et al., 2015;
Frôlicher et al., 2016; Jones et al., 2016).

Chapter 1

‘Detection and Attribution’ assesses evidence for past changes in
the ocean and cryosphere, relative to normal/reference-interval
conditions (detection), and the extent to which these changes have
been caused by anthropogenic dimate change or by other factors
(attribution) (Bindoff et al., 2013; Cramer et al., 2014; Knutson et al.,
2017; Figure 1.1d). Reliable detection and attribution is fundamental
to our understanding of the scientific basis of dimate change (Hegerl
et al, 2010). For example, the main attribution conclusion of the
IPCC 4th Assessment Report (AR4), in other words, that ‘most of the
observed increase in global average temperatures since the mid-20th
century is very likely due to the observed increase in anthropogenic
greenhouse gas concentrations’, has had a strong impact on climate
policy (Petersen, 2011). In ARS this attribution statement was elevated
to ‘extremely likely’ (Bindoff et al, 2013). Statistical approaches for
attribution often involve using contrasting forcing scenarios in climate
model experiments to detect the forcing that best explains an observed
change (Figure 1.1d). In addition to passing the statistical test, a
successful attribution also requires a firm process understanding.
Confident attribution remains challenging though, especially when
there are multiple or confounding factors that influence the state
of a system (Hegerl et al, 2010). Particular challenges to detection
and attribution in the ocean and cryosphere include the often
short observational records (Section 1.8.1.1, Figure 1.3), which are
particularly confounding given the long adjustment time scales to
anthropogenic forcing of many properties of interest.

Extreme dimate events (e.g., marine heatwaves or storm surges) push
a system to near or beyond the ends of its normally observed range
(Seneviratne et al, 2012; Figure 1.1b; Chapter 6;). Extremes can be
very costly in terms of loss oflife, ecosystem destruction, and economic
damage. In à system affected by climate change, the recurrence and
intensity of these extreme events can change much faster and have
greater impacts than changes of the average system state (Easterling
et al., 2000; Parmesan et al. 2000; Hughes et al., 2018). Of particular
concern are ‘compound events’, when the joint probability of two or
more properties of a system is extreme at the same time or closely
connected in time and space (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1;
Sections 4.3.4, 6.8). Such a compound event is given, for example,
when marine heatwaves co-occur with very low nutrient levels in the
ocean potentially resulting in extreme impacts (Bond et al. 2015).The
interconnectedness of the ocean and cryosphere (Section 1.2.2) can
also lead to cascading effects where changes in one element trigger
secondary changes in completely different but connected elements
of the systems, including its socioeconomic aspects. (Figure 1.1e). An
example is the large change in ocean productivity triggered by the
changes in circulation and iron inputs induced by the large outflow of
melt waters from Greenland (Kanna et al. 2018). New methodologies
for attributing extreme events and the risks they bring to climate
change have emerged since AR5 (Trenberth et al., 2015; Stott et al.
2016; Kirchmeier-Young et al., 2017; Otto, 2017), especially also for
the attribution of individual events through an assessment of the
fraction of attributable risk (Figure 1.1f).

81

 
Chapter 1 Framing and Context of the Report

{a) Dynamic Response of Systems {b) Variability, Time of Emergence and Extremes

   

Forcing

 

Climate variable

abrupt, nonlinear
em PR OR
ER

|
|
|
|
f

 

linear, in sync with forcing Extremesl
I

      
 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2] threshold,_ delayed ue
& | ipping point ee" variability envelope
AP no response of reference period
| l! FO
time | time
Reference period Time of emergence
{c) Tipping Points {d) Detection and Attribution

  

 
 
  
  

simulations with
forcing of interest

observations

Climate variable

 

    

I Let] COUT E

Tipping point

CEA CE TUE

{x) = system's response time

{e) Cascading Effects

 

| time

{f) Event Attribution

 
  

 
     
 
 
   
 
   

  
   
  

Actual world Threshold
… with anthropogenic
Dire |
rare) Eee forcing \K

 

FAR=1 Pan
=1.

nat

(EL ES
Natural world
Human action
Mitigation/
Adaptation

Normalized likelihood

   
  
   

  
  
   
  

oO

Human Systems
(MELLE

So
Es

Ecological
Changes

   
 

Climate variable

Figure 1.1 | Schematic of key concepts associated with changes in the ocean and cryosphere. (a) Differing responses of systems to gradual forcing (e.g., linear, delayed,
abrupt, nonlinear). (b) Evolution of a dynamical system in time, revealing both natural (unforced) variability and a response to a new (e.g., anthropogenic) forcing. Key
concepts include (i) the time of emergence and (ii) extreme events near or beyond the observed range of variability. (c) Tipping points and the change of their behaviour
through time in response to, for example, anthropogenic change (adapted from Lenton et al, 2008). The two minima represent two stable fixed points, separated by a
maximum representing an unstable fixed point, acting as a tipping point. The ball represents the state of the system with the red dash line indicating the stability of the
fixed point and the system's response time to small perturbations. (d) Detection and attribution, Le., the statistical framework used to determine whether a change occurs
or not (detection), and whether this detected change is caused by a particular set of forcings (e.g., greenhouse gases) (attribution). (e) Cascading effects, where changes
in one part of a system inevitably affect the state in another, and so forth, ultimately affecting the state of the entire system. These cascading effects can also trigger
feedbacks, altering the forcing. (f) Event attribution and fraction of attributable risk. The blue (orange) probability density function shows the likelihood of the occurrence
of a particular value of a climate variable of interest under natural (present = including anthropogenic forcing) conditions. The corresponding areas above the threshold
indicate the probabilities Par and Pant of exceedance of this threshold. The fraction of attributable risk (given by FAR = 1 — Pant/Pnat ) indicates the likelihood that a particular
event has occurred as a consequence of anthropogenic change (adapted from Stott et al, 2016).

82
Framing and Context of the Report

1.4 Changes in the Ocean and Cryosphere
Earth's dimate, ocean and cryosphere vary across a wide range
of time scales. This includes the seasonal growth and melting of
sea ice, interannual variation of ocean temperature caused by the
El Niño-Southern Oscillation and ice age cydes across tens to
hundreds of thousands of years.

Climate variability can arise from internally generated (i.e., unforced)
fluctuations in the climate system. Variability can also occur in
response to external forcings, including volcanic eruptions, changes
in the Earth's orbit around the Sun, oscillations in solar activity and
changing atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations.

Since the onset of the industrial revolution, human activities have
had a strong impact on the climate system, including the ocean
and cryosphere. Human activities have altered the external forcings
acting on Earth's dimate (Myhre et al, 2013) by changes in land
use (albedo), and changes in atmospheric aerosols (e.g. soot)
from the burning of biomass and fossil fuels. Most significantly,
human activities have led to an accumulation of greenhouse gases
(induding CO) in the atmosphere as a result of the burning of fossil
fuels, cement production, agriculture and land use change. In 2016,
the global average atmospheric CO2 concentration crossed 400 parts
per million, a level Earth's atmosphere did not experience for at least
the past 800,000 years and possibly much longer (Lüthi et al, 2008;
Fischer et al, 2018). These anthropogenic forcings have not only
warmed the ocean and begun to melt the cryosphere, but have also
led to widespread biogeochemical changes driven by the oceanic
uptake of anthropogenic CO2 from the atmosphere (IPCC, 2013).

It is now nearly three decades since the first assessment report of
the IPCC, and over that time evidence and confidence in observed
and projected ocean and cryosphere changes have grown (very
high confidence; Table SM1.1). Confidence in climate warming
and its anthropogenic causes has increased across assessment
cycles; robust detection was not yet possible in 1990, but has been
characterised as unequivocal since AR4 in 2007. Projections of
near-term warming rates in early reports have been realised over
the subsequent decades, while projections have tended to err on the
side of caution for sea level rise and ocean heat uptake that have
developed faster than predicted (Brysse et al, 2013; Section 4.2,
5.2). Areas of concern in early reports which were expected but
not observable are now emerging. The expected acceleration of sea
level rise is now observed with high confidence (Section 4.2). There
is emerging evidence in sustained observations and from long-term
palaeoclimate reconstructions for the expected slow-down of AMOC
(medium confidence), although this remains to be properly attributed
(Section 6.7). Significant sea level rise contributions from Antarctic
ice sheet mass loss (very high confidence), which earlier reports
did not expect to manifest this century, are already being observed
(Section 3.3.1). Other newly emergent characteristics of ocean
and cryosphere change (e.g., marine heat waves; Section 6.4) are
assessed for the first time in SROCC.

 

Chapter 1

AR5 (IPCC, 2013; IPCC, 2014) provides ample evidence of profound
and pervasive changes in the ocean and cryosphere (Sections 1.4.1,
1.4.2), and along with the recent SR15 report (IPCC, 2018), is the
point of departure for the updated assessments made in SROCC.

1.4.1 Observed and Projected Changes in the Ocean
increasing greenhouse gases in the atmosphere cause heat uptake
in the Earth system (Section 1.2) and as reported since 1970, there
is high confidence? that the majority (more than 90%) of the extra
thermal energy in the Earth's system is stored in the global ocean
(IPCC, 2013). Mean ocean surface temperature has increased since the
19705 at a rate of 0.11 (0.09-0.13)°C per decade (high confidence),
and forms part of a long-term warming of the surface ocean since
the mid-19th century. The upper ocean (0-700 m, virtually certain)
and intermediate ocean (700 to 2,000 m, likely) have warmed since
the 1970s. Ocean heat uptake has continued unabated since AR5
(Sections 3.2.1.2.1, 5.2), increasing the risk of marine heat waves and
other extreme events (Section 6.4). During the 21st century, ocean
warming is projected to continue even if anthropogenic greenhouse
gas emissions cease (Sections 1.3, 5.2). The global water cycle has
been altered, resulting in substantial regional changes in sea surface
salinity (high confidence; Rhein et al., 2013), which is expected to
continue in the future (Sections 5.2.2, 6.3, 6.5).

The rate of sea level rise since the mid-19th century has been larger
than the mean rate of the previous two millennia (high confidence).
Over the period 1901 to 2010, global mean sea level rose by 0.19
(0.17-0.21) m (high confidence) (Church et al., 2013; Table SM1.1).
Sea level rise continues due to freshwater added to the ocean by
melting of glaciers and ice sheets, and as a result of ocean expansion
due to continuous ocean warming, with a projected acceleration
and century to millennial-scale commitments for ongoing rise
(Section 4.2.3). In SROCC, recent developments of ice sheet modelling
are assessed (Sections 1.8, 4.3, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3)
and the projected sea level rise at the end of 21st century is higher
than reported in AR5 but with a larger uncertainty range (Sections
4.2.3.2, 42.33).

By 2011, the ocean had taken up about 30 + 7% of the anthropogenic
CO that had been released to the atmosphere since the industrial
revolution (Ciais et al, 2013; Section 5.2). In response, ocean pH
decreased by 0.1 since the beginning of the industrial era (high
confidence), corresponding to an increase in acidity of 26% (Table
SM1.1) and leading to both positive and negative biological and
ecological impacts (high confidence) (Gattuso et al., 2014). Evidence
is increasing that the ocean's oxygen content is dedining (Oschlies
et al, 2018). AR5 did not come to a final conclusion with regard
to potential long-term changes in ocean productivity due to short
observational records and divergent scientific evidence (Boyd et al.
2014; Section 5.2.2). Ocean acidification and deoxygenation are
projected to continue over the next century with high confidence
(Sections 3.2.2.3, 5.2.2).

3 Confidence/likeliood statemenis in Sections 1.4.1 and 1.4.2 derived from AR5 and SR15, unless otherwise specified.

83

 
 

Chapter 1

1.4.2 Observed and Projected Changes

in the Cryosphere

Changes in the cryosphere documented in AR5 induded the
widespread retreat of glaciers (high confidence), mass loss from
the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets (high confidence)
and declining extents of Arctic sea ice (very high confidence)
and Northern Hemisphere spring snow cover (very high confidence:
IPCC, 2013; Vaughan et al., 2013).

A particularly rapid change in Earth's cryosphere has been the
decrease in Arctic sea ice extent in all seasons (Section 3.2.1.1). AR5
assessed that there was medium confidence that a nearly ice-free
summer Arctic Ocean is /ikely to occur before mid-century under a
high emissions future (IPCC, 2013), and SR15 assessed that ice-free
summers are projected to occur at least once per century at 1.5°C
of warming, and at least once per decade at 2°C of warming above
pre-industrial levels (IPCC, 2018). Sea ice thickness is decreasing
further in the Northern Hemisphere and older ice that has survived
multiple summers is rapidly disappearing; most sea ice in the Arctic
is now ‘first year‘ ice that grows in the autumn and winter but melts
during the spring and summer (AMAP, 2017).

ARS assessed that the annual mean loss from the Greenland ice sheet
very likely substantially increased from 34 (-6-74) Gt yr! (billion
tonnes yr”!) over the period 1992-2001, to 215 (157-274) Gtyr-! over
the period 2002-2011 (IPCC, 2013). The average rate of ice loss from

Framing and Context of the Report

the Antarctic ice sheet also /ikely increased from 30 (-37-97) Gt yr!
over the period 1992-2001, to 147 (72-221) Gt yr! over the period
2002-2011 (IPCC, 2013). The average rate of ice loss from glaciers
around the world (excluding glaciers on the periphery of the ice
sheets), was very likely 226 (91-361) Gt yr-! over the period 1971—
2009, and 275 (140-410) Gt yr-! over the period 1993-2009 (IPCC,
2013). The Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets are continuing to lose
mass at an accelerating rate (Section 3.3) and glaciers are continuing
to lose mass worldwide (Section 2.2.3, Cross-Chapter Box 6 in
Chapter 2). Confidence in the quantification of glacier and ice sheet
mass loss has increased across successive IPCC reports (Table SM1.1)
due to the development of remote sensing observational methods
(Section 1.8.1).

Changes in seasonal snow are best documented for the Northern
Hemisphere. ARS reported that the extent of snow cover has
decreased since the mid-20th century (very high confidence).
Negative trends in both snow depth and duration are also detected
with station observations (medium confidence), although results
depend on elevation and observational period (Section 2.2.2). AR5
assessed that permafrost temperatures have increased in most
regions since the early 1980s (high confidence), and the rate of
increase has varied regionally (IPCC, 2013). Methane and carbon
dioxide release from soil organic carbon is projected to continue in
high mountain and polar regions (Box 2.2), and SROCC has used
multiple lines of evidence to reduce uncertainty in permafrost change
assessments (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1, Section 3.4.3.1.1).

Cross-Chapter Box 1 | Scenarios, Pathways and Reference Periods

Authors: Nerilie Abram (Australia), William Cheung (Canada), Lijing Cheng (China), Thomas Frôlicher (Switzerland), Mathias Hauser
(Switzerland), Shengping He (Norway/China), Anne Hollowed (USA), Ben Marzeion (Germany), Samuel Morin (France), Anna Pirani
(Italy), Didier Swingedouw (France)

Introduction

Assessing the future risks and opportunities that dimate change will bring for the ocean and cryosphere, and for their dependent
ecosystems and human communities, is a main objective of this report. However the future is inherently uncertain. À well-established
methodological approach that the Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC) report uses to assess
the future under these uncertainties is through scenario analysis (Kainuma et al, 2018). The ultimate physical driver of the ocean and
cryosphere changes that SROCC assesses are greenhouse gas emissions, while the exposure to hazards and the future risks to natural
and human systems are also shaped social, economic and governance factors (Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1; Section 1.5). This
Cross-Chapter Box introduces the main scenarios that are used in the SROCC assessment. Examples of key climate change indicators
in the atmosphere and ocean projected under future greenhouse gas emission scenarios are also provided (Table CB1.1).

Scenarios and pathways

Scenarios are a plausible description of how the future may develop based on a coherent and internally consistent set of assumptions
about key driving forces and relationships. Pathways refer to the temporal evolution of natural and/or human systems towards a future
state. In SROCC, assessments of future change frequently use climate model projections forced by pathways of future radiative forcing
changes related to different socioeconomic scenarios.

Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPS) are a set of time series of plausible future concentrations of greenhouse gases, aerosols
and chemically active gases, as well as land use changes (Moss et al., 2008; Moss et al., 2010; van Vuuren et al.,, 2011a; Figure SM1.1).
The word representative signifies that each RCP provides only one of many possible pathways that would lead to the specific radiative
forcing characteristics. The term pathway emphasises the fact that not only the long-term concentration levels, but also the trajectory
taken over time to reach that outcome are of interest.

84
Framing and Context of the Report Chapter 1

Cross-Chapter Box 1 (continued)

Four RCPs were used for projections of the future climate in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) (Taylor et al.
2012). They are identified by their approximate anthropogenic radiative forcing (in W m°?, relative to 1750) by 2100: RCP2.6, RCP4.5,
RCP6.0, and RCP8.5 (Figure SM1.1). RCP8.5 is a high greenhouse gas emission scenario without effective climate change mitigation
policies, leading to continued and sustained growth in atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations (Riahi et al, 2011). RCP2.6
represents a low greenhouse gas emission, high mitigation future that gives a two in three chance of limiting global atmospheric
surface warming to below 2°C by the end of the century (van Vuuren et al, 2011b; Collins et al. 2013; Allen et al, 2018). Achieving the
RCP2.6 pathway would require implementation of negative emissions technologies at a not-yet-proven scale to remove greenhouse
gases from the air, in addition to other mitigation strategies such as energy from sustainable sources and existing nature-based
strategies (Gasser et al, 2015; Sanderson et al., 2016; Royal Society, 2018; National Academies of Sciences, 2019). An even more
stringent RCP1.9 pathway is considered most compatible with limiting global warming to below 1.5°C, called a 1.5°C-consistent
pathway in the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C (SR15; O'Neill et al, 2016; IPCC, 2018), and will be assessed in the IPCC
6th Assessment Report (AR6) using projections of Phase 6 of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP6). Global fossil
CO2 emissions rose more than 2% in 2018 and 1.6% in 2017, after a temporary slowdown in emissions from 2014-2016. Current
emissions continue to grow in line with the RCP8.5 trajectory (Peters et al., 2012; Le Quéré et al., 2018).

 

In SROCC, the CMIPS simulations forced with RCPs are used extensively to assess future ocean and cryosphere changes. In particular,
RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 are used to contrast the possible outcomes of low-emission versus high-emission futures, respectively
(Table CB1.1). In some cases the SROCC assessments use literature that is based on the earlier Special Report on Emission Scenarios
(SRES; IPCC, 2000), and details of these and their approximate RCP equivalents are provided in Tables SM1.3 and SM1.4.

Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) complement the RCPs with varying socioeconomic challenges to adaptation and mitigation
(e.g., population, economic growth, education, urbanisation and the rate of technological development; O'Neill et al., 2017). The SSPs
describe five alternative socioeconomic futures comprising: sustainable development (SSP1), middle-of-the-road development (SSP2),
regional rivalry (SSP3), inequality (SSP4), and fossil-fuelled development (SSP5; Figure SM1.1; Kriegler et al., 2016; Riahi et al., 2017).
The RCPs set plausible pathways for greenhouse gas concentrations and the climate changes that could occur, and the SSPs set the
stage on which reductions in emissions will or will not be achieved within the context of the underlying socioeconomic characteristics
and shared policy assumptions of that world. The combination of SSP-based socioeconomic scenarios and RCP-based climate
projections provides an integrative frame for climate impact and policy analysis. The SSPs will be included in the CMIP6 simulations to
be assessed in AR6 (O'Neill et al., 2016). In SROCC, the SSPs are used only for contextualising estimates from the literature on varying
future populations in regions exposed to ocean and cryosphere changes.

Baselines and reference intervals

A baseline provides a reference period from which changes can be evaluated. In the context of anthropogenic climate change, the
baseline should ideally approximate the ‘pre-industrial” conditions before significant human influences on the climate began. The IPCC
5th Assessment Report (AR5) and SR15 (Allen et al., 2018) use 1850-1900 as the pre-industrial baseline for assessing historical and
future climate change. Atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations and global surface temperatures had already begun to rise in this
interval from early industrialisation (Abram et al., 2016; Hawkins et al, 2017; Schurer et al., 2017). However, the scarcity of reliable
dimate observations represents a major challenge for quantifying earlier pre-industrial states (Hawkins et al., 2017). To maintain
consistency across IPCC reports, the 1850-1900 pre-industrial baseline is used wherever possible in SROCC, recognising that this is a
compromise between data coverage and representativeness of typical pre-industrial conditions.

In SROCC, the 1986-2005 reference interval used in ARS is referred to as the recent past, and à 2006-2015 reference is used for present
day, consistent with SR15 (Allen et al., 2018). The 2006-2015 reference interval incorporates near-global upper ocean data coverage
and reasonably comprehensive remote-sensing cryosphere data (Section 1.8.1), and aligns this report with a more current reference
than the 1986-2005 reference adopted by ARS. This 10-year present day period is short relative to natural variability. However, at this
decadal scale the bias in the present day interval due to natural variability is generally small compared to differences between present
day conditions and the pre-industrial baseline. There is also no indication of global average surface temperature in either 1986-2005 or
2006-2015 being substantially biased by short-term variability (Allen et al, 2018), consistent with the ARS finding that each of the last
three decades has been successively warmer at the Earth's surface than any preceding decade since 1850 (IPCC, 2013).

SROCC commonly provides future change assessments for two key intervals: À near term interval of 2031-2050 is comparable

to a single generation time scale from present day, and incorporates the interval when global warming is likely to reach 1.5°C
if warming continues at the current rate (IPCC, 2018). An end-of-century interval of 2081-2100 represents the average climate

85
Chapter 1 Framing and Context of the Report

Table CB1.1 | Projected change in global mean surface air temperature and key ocean variables for the near term (2031-2050) and end-of-century (2081-2700)
relative to the recent past (1986-2005) reference period from CMIP5. See Table SM1.2 for the list of CMIP5 models and ensemble member used for calculating these
projections. Small differences in the projections given here compared with ARS (e.q,, Table 12.2 in Collins et al., 2013) reflect differences in the number of models
available now compared to at the time of the ARS assessment (Table SM1.2).

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Near term: 2031-2050 End-of-century: 2081-2100
TUE) LEE 5-95% range LL 5-95% range
RCP2.6 0.9 0.5 to 1.4 1.0 0.3 to 1.7
Global Mean Surface RCP4,5 1.1 0.7 to 1.5 1.8 1.0 to 2.6
: bÇ) à
Airtenpeeue (Q RCP6.0 1.0 05to14 23 14to32
RCP8.5 14 0.9 to 1.8 3.7 2.6 to 48
Global Mean Sea RCP2.6 0.64 0.33 to 0.96 0.73 0.20 to 1.27
Surface Temperature {°C) ?
{Section 5.2.5) RCP8.5 0.95 0.60 to 1.29 2.58 1.64 to 3.51
mt RCP2.6 -0.072 -0.072 to -0.072 -0.065 -0.065 to -0.066
Surface pH (units)
Essen 4225) RCPB.5 -0.108 -0.106 to -0.110 -0315 -0313 to -0.317
Dissolved Oxygen {100-600 m) RCP2.6 -0.9 -0.3 to -1.5 -0.6 0.0to-1.2
{% change)
{Section 5.2.2.4)? RCP8.5 -1.4 -1.0 to -1.8 -3.9 -2.9 to -5.0
Notes:

2 Calculated following the same procedure as the IPCC 5th Assessment Report (AR5) (Table 12.2 in Collins et al, 2013). The 5-95% model range of global mean
surface air temperature across CMIPS projections was assessed in ARS as the fkely range, after accounting for additional uncertainties or different levels of confidence
in models.

bThe 5-95% model range for global mean sea surface temperature, surface pH and dissolved oxygen (100-600 m) as referred to in the SROCC assessment as the
very likely range (Section 1.9.2, Figure 1.4).

conditions reached at the end of the standard CMIP5 future dimate simulations and is relevant to long-term infrastructure planning
and climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs) (Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1). In some cases where committed changes
exist over multi-century time scales, such as the assessment of future sea level rise (Section 4.3.2) or deep ocean oxygen changes
(Section 5.2.4.2, Table 5.5), SROCC also considers model evidence for /ong-term changes beyond the end of the current century.

Key indicators of future ocean and cryosphere change

Table CB1.1 compiles information on key indicators of climate change in the atmosphere and ocean. This information is given for
different RCPs and for changes in the near term and end-of-century assessment intervals, relative to the recent past, noting that this
does not capture changes that have already taken place since the pre-industrial baseline. SR15 assessed that global mean surface
warming from the pre-industrial (1850-1900) to the recent past (1986-2005) reference period was 0.63°C (fkely range of 0.57°C-
0.69°C), and during the present day interval (2006-2015) was 0.87°C (fkely range of 0.75°C—0.990C) higher than the average over
the 1850-1900 pre-industrial period (very high confidence; IPCC, 2018).

These key climate and ocean change indicators allow for some harmonisation of the risk assessments in the chapters of SROCC.
Projections of future change across a wider range of ocean and cryosphere components is also provided in Figure 1.5. Ocean and
cryosphere changes and risks by the end-of-century (2081-2100) are expected to be larger under high greenhouse gas emission
scenarios, compared with low greenhouse gas emission scenarios (very high confidence) (Table CB1.1, Figure 1.5).

86
Framing and Context of the Report

1.5 Risk and Impacts Related to Ocean

and Cryosphere Change

SROCC assesses the risks (le. potential for adverse consequences)
and impacts (Le, manifested risk) resulting from dimate-related
changes in the ocean and cryosphere. Knowledge on risk is essential
for conceiving and implementing adequate responses. Cross-Chapter
Box 2 in Chapter 1 introduces key concepts of risk, adaptation,
resilience and transformation, and explains why and how they matter
for this report.

In SROCC, the term ‘natural system’ describes the biological and
physical components of the environment, independent of human
involvement but potentially affected by human activities. ‘Natural
systems’ may refer to portions of the total system without necessarily
considering all its components (e.g., an ocean upwelling system).
Throughout the assessment usage of ‘natural system’ does not imply
a system unaltered by human activities.

‘Human systems’ include physiological, health, socio-cultural,
belief, technological, economic, food, political, and legal systems,
among others. Humans have depended upon the Earth's ocean
(WOA, 2016; IPBES, 2018b) and cryosphere (AMAP, 2011; Hovelsrud
et al. 2011; Watt-Cloutier, 2018) for many millennia (Redman, 1999).
Contemporary human populations still depend directly on elements
of the ocean and cryosphere, and the ecosystem services they provide,
but at a much larger scale and with greater environmental impact
than in pre-industrial times (Inniss and Simcock, 2017).

An ecosystem is a functional unit consisting of living organisms, their
non-living environment, and the interactions within and between
them. Ecosystems can be nested within other ecosystems and their

Chapter 1

scale can range from very small to the entire biosphere. Today, most
ecosystems either contain humans as key organisms, or are influenced
by the effects of human activities in their environment. In SROCC, a
social-ecological system describes the combined system and all of its
sub-components and refers specifically to the interaction of natural
and human systems.

The ocean and cryosphere are unique systems that have intrinsic
value, including the ecosystems and biodiversity they support.
Frameworks of Ecosystem Services and Nature's Contributions to
People are both used within SROCC to assess the impacts of changes
in the ocean and cryosphere on humans directly, and through changes
to the ecosystems that support human life and civilisations (Sections
2.3, 34.32, 433.5, 5.4, 6.4, 65, 6.8). The Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment (MEA, 2005) established à conceptual Ecosystem
Services framework between biodiversity, human well-being, and
drivers of change. This framework highlights that natural systems
provide vital life-support services to humans and the planet, including
direct material services (e.g., food, timber), non-material services
(e.g., cultural continuity, health), and many services that regulate
environmental status (e.g., soil formation, water purification). This
framework supports decision-making by quantifying benefits for
valuation and trade-off analyses. The Ecosystem Services framework
has been challenged as monetising the relationships of people with
nature, and undervaluing small-scale livelihoods, cultural values and
other considerations that contribute little to global commerce (Diaz
et al., 2018). More recent frameworks, such as Nature's Contributions
to People (Diaz et al., 2018), used in the Intergovernmental Platform
on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services assessments (IPBES), aim to
better encompass the non-commercial ways that nature contributes
to human quality of life.

Cross-Chapter Box 2 | Key Concepts of Risk, Adaptation, Resilience and Transformation

 

Authors: Matthias Garschagen (Germany), Carolina Adler (Switzerland/Australia), Susie Crate (USA), Hélène Jacot Des Combes
(Fiji/France), Bruce Glavovic (New Zealand/South Africa), Sherilee Harper (Canada), Elisabeth Holland (Fiji USA), Gary Kofinas (USA),
Sean O'Donoghue (South Africa), Ben Orlove (USA), Zita Sebesvari (Hungary/Germany), Martin Sommerkorn (Norway/Germany)

This box introduces key concepts used in the Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC) in relation to
risk, adaptation, resilience, and transformation. Building on an assessment of the current literature, it provides a conceptual framing
for the report and for the assessments within its chapters. Full definitions of key terms are provided in the SROCC Annex |: Glossary.

Risk and adaptation

SROCC considers risk from dimate change-related effects on the ocean and cryosphere as the result of the interaction between:
(1) environmental hazards triggered by dimate change, (2) exposure of humans, infrastructure and ecosystems to those hazards,
and (3) systems’ vulnerabilities. Risk refers to the potential for adverse consequences, and impacts refer to materialised effects
of climate change. Next to assessing risk and impacts specifically resulting from climate change-related effects on the ocean, coast and
cryosphere, SROCC is also concerned with the options to reduce climate-related risk.

Beyond mitigation, adaptation is a key avenue to reduce risk (Section 1.6). Adaptation can also include exploiting new opportunities;
however, this box focuses on risk, and thus, the latter is not discussed in detail here. Adaptation efforts link into the causal fabric of
risk by reducing existing and future vulnerability, exposure, and/or (where possible) hazards (Figure CB2.1). Addressing the different
risk components (hazards, exposure and vulnerability) involves assessing and selecting options for policy.

87
Chapter 1 Framing and Context of the Report

Cross-Chapter Box 2 (continued)

Actions to reduce
LÉFZTTE

Examples include:
*Ecosystem-based measures

to reduce coastal flooding

* Mangroves to alleviate coastal
storm energy

+ Water reservoirs to buffer
low-flows and water scarcity

Limits to Adaptation

* E.g. physical, ecological, technological,
economic, political, institutional,
psychological, and/or socio-cultural

   

ETAON CRC Ee TeS
Vulnerability

Examples include:
+ Social protection

 

Vulnerabilit:
b - Livelihood diversification

- Insurance solutions

- Hazard-proof housing
and infrastructure

ETCR ER CRE CAS
STONE
Examples include:
+ Coastal retreat and resettlement

* Risk sensitive land use planning

* Early warning systems and
evacuations

Figure CB2.1 | There are options for risk reduction through adaptation. Adaptation can reduce risk by addressing one or more of the three risk factors: vulnerability,
exposure, and/or hazard. The reduction of vulnerability, exposure, and/or hazard potential can be achieved through different policy and action choices over time until
limits to adaptation might be reached. The figure builds on the conceptual framework of risk used in the IPCC 5th Assessment Report (AR5) (Oppenheimer et al., 2014).

and action. Such decision-making entails evaluation of the effectiveness, efficiency, efficacy and acceptance of actions. Adaptation
responses are more effective when they promote resilience to climate change, consider plausible futures and unexpected events,
strengthen essential or desired characteristics as well as values of the responding system and/or make adjustments to avoid
unsustainable pathways (high agreement, medium evidence; Section 2.3; Box 2.4; 4.4.4; 4.4.5).

Adaptation requires adaptive capacity, which for human systems includes assets (financial, physical, and/or ecological), capital (social
and institutional), knowledge and technical know-how (Klein et al., 2014). The extent of adaptive capacity determines adaptation
potential, but does not necessarily translate into effective adaptation if awareness of the need to act, the willingness to act and/or the
cooperation needed to act is lacking (high confidence; Sections 2.3; Box 2.4; 4.3.2.6.3; 5.5.2.4).

There are limits to adaptation, which include, for example, physical, ecological, technological, economic, political, institutional,
psychological and/or socio-cultural aspects (medium evidence, high agreement) (Dow et al., 2013; Barnett et al., 2014; Klein et al.
2014). For example, the ability to adapt to sea level rise depends, in part, on the elevation of the low-lying islands and coasts in
question, but also on the capacity to successfully negotiate protection or relocation measures socially and politically (Cross-Chapter
Box 9, also see Section 6.4.3 for a wider overview). Limits to adaptation are sometimes considered as something different from
barriers to adaptation. Barriers can in principle be overcome if adaptive capacity is available (e.g., where funding is made available),
even though overcoming barriers is often hard in reality, particularly for resource-poor communities and countries (high confidence;
Section 4.4.3). Limits to adaptation are reached when adaptation no longer allows an actor or ecosystem to secure valued objectives
or key functions from intolerable risks (Section 4.4.2; Dow et al., 2013). Defining tolerable risks and key system functions is, therefore,
of central importance for the assessment of limits to adaptation.

Residual risks (1e, the risk that endures following adaptation and risk reduction efforts) remain even where adaptation is possible
(very high confidence; Chapters 2-6; Section 6.3.2; Table 6.2). Residual risks have bearing on the emerging debate about loss and
damage (Huq et al., 2013; Warner and van der Geest, 2013; Boyd et al., 2017; Djalante et al., 2018; Mechler et al., 2018; Roy et al.
2018). This report addresses loss and damage in relation to slow onset processes, including ocean changes (Section 5.4.2.3), sea level
rise (Section 4.3), and glacier retreat (Section 2.3.6), and polar cryosphere changes (Section 3.4.3.3.4), as well as rapid onset hazards
such as tropical cyclones (Chapter 6). The assessment encompasses non-economic losses, including the impacts on intrinsic and

88
Framing and Context of the Report Chapter 1

Cross-Chapter Box 2 (continued)

General strategies
for enhancing social-ecological resilience
to support dlimate-resilient pathways

 

Sent Maintain diversity
Sovermance = and redundancy

   

Manage slow variables =
and feedbacks

Encourage learning

The implementation of and experimentation

resilience strategies
is supported by:

D Problem recognition & framing

Foster complex
Manage connectivity system understanding

I Policy innovation & institutional fit
M Enabling socio-political setting

Figure CB2.2 | General strategies for enhancing social-ecological résilience to support dimate-resilient pathways have been identified. The seven strategies are
adapted from synthesis papers by Biggs et al. (2012) and Quinlan et al. (2016), the illustration of the dimate-resilient development pathway (CRDP) builds on Figure
SPM9 in the IPCC 5th Assessment Report (AR5) (IPCC, 2014).

spiritual attributes with which high mountain societies value their landscapes (Section 2.3.5); the interconnected relationship with,
and reliance upon, the land, water and ice for culture, livelihoods and wellbeing in the Arctic (Section 3.4.3.3); and cultural heritage
and displacement addressed in the Cross-Chapter Box on low-lying islands and coasts (Cross-Chapter Box 9; Burkett, 2016; Markham
et al. 2016; Tschakert et al., 2017; Huggel et al., 2018).

Building resilience

Addressing climate change-related risk, impacts (including extreme events and shocks) and trade-offs together with shaping the
trajectories of social and ecological systems is facilitated by considering resilience (Biggs et al., 2012; Quinlan et al, 2016). In SROCC,
resilience is understood as the capacity of interconnected social, economic and ecological systems to cope with disturbances by
reorganising in ways that maintain their essential function, structure, and identity (Walker et al., 2004). Resilience may be considered
as a positive attribute of a system and an aspirational goal when it contributes to the capacity for adaptation and learning without
changing the structure, function, and identity of the system (Walker et al., 2004; Steiner, 2015). Alternately, resilience may be used
descriptively as a system property that is neither good nor bad (Walker et al., 2004; Chapin et al., 2009; Weichselgartner and Kelman,
2014). For example, a system can be highly resilient in keeping its unfavoured attributes, such as poverty or institutional rigidity
(Carpenter and Brock, 2008). Critics of the resilience concept warn that the application of resilience to social systems is problematic
when the responsibility for resilience building is shifted onto the shoulders of vulnerable and resource-poor populations (e.g., Chandler,
2013; Reid, 2013; Rigg and Oven, 2015; Tierney, 2015; Olsson et al., 2017).

Applying the concept of resilience in mitigation and adaptation planning builds the capadity of a social-ecological system to navigate
anticipated changes and unexpected events (Biggs et al, 2012; Varma et al., 2014; Sud et al, 2015). Resilience also emphasises
social-ecological system dynamics, including the possibility of crossing critical thresholds and experiencing à regime shift (ie. state
change). Seven general strategies for building social-ecological resilience have been identified (Figure CB2.2; Ostrom, 2010; Biggs
et al, 2012; Quinlan et al, 2016). The concept of resilience also allows analysts, accessors of risk and decision makers to recognise
how climate-change related risks often cannot be fully avoided or alleviated despite adaptation. For SROCC, this is especially relevant
along low-lying coasts, high mountain areas and the polar regions (medium evidence high agreement: Sections 2.3; 2.4; 3.5, 6.8, 6.9).

Many efforts are underway to apply resilience thinking in assessments, management practices, policy making and the day-to-
day practices of affected sectors and local communities. For example, leaders of the Pacific small island developing states use
the Framework for Resilient Development in the Pacific, which integrates climate change and disaster risk management (Pacific
Community, 2016; Cross-Chapter Box 9). In the Philippines, a new framework has been developed to conduct full inventories of

89
Chapter 1 Framing and Context of the Report

Cross-Chapter Box 2 (continued)

actual and projected loss and damage due to climate change and associated disasters such as from cyclones. Creating such an
inventory is difficult due to the disconnect between tools for dimate change assessment and those for post disaster assessment
(Florano, 2018). In Arctic Alaska, evaluative frameworks are being applied to determine needs, responsibilities, and alternative actions
associated with coastal village relocations (Bronen, 2015; Cross-Chapter Box 9). In all these initiatives, resilience is a key consideration
for enabling CRDPSs.

 

Climate-resilient development pathways (CRDPs)

CRDP are a relatively new concept to describe dimate change mitigation and adaptation trajectories that strengthen sustainable
development and efforts to eradicate poverty and reduce inequalities while promoting fair and cross-scalar adaptation to, and
resilience in, a changing climate (Kainuma et al, 2018; Roy et al. 2018). CRDPS are increasingly being explored as an approach
for combining scientific assessments, stakeholder participation, and forward-looking development planning, acknowledging that
pursuing CRDP is not only a technical challenge of risk management but also a social and political process (Roy et al., 2018). Adaptive
decision-making over time is key to CRDPs (Haasnoot et al., 2013; Wise et al., 2014; Fazey et al., 2016; Ramm et al, 2017; Bloemen
et al., 2018; Lawrence et al., 2018). CRDPs accommodate both the interacting cultural, social, and ecosystem factors that influence
multi-stakeholder decision making processes, and the overall sustainability of adaptation measures.

Adequate climate change mitigation and adaptation allows for opportunities for sustainable development pathways and the options for
resilience building. CRDPS involve series of mitigation and adaptation choices over time, balancing short-term and long-term goals
and accommodating newly available knowledge (Denton et al. 2014). The CRDPs approach has been successfully used, for example,
in urban, remote and disadvantaged communities, and can showcase the potential to counter maladaptive choices (e.g., Barnett et al,
2014; Butler et al., 2014; Maru et al, 2014). CRDPSs aim to establish narratives of hope and opportunity that can extend beyond risk
reduction and coping (Amundsen et al. 2018). Although climate change impacts on the ocean and cryosphere elicit many emotions,
including fear, anger, despair and apathy (Cunsolo Willox et al., 2013; Cunsolo and Landman, 2017; Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018), narratives
of hope are critical in provoking motivation, creative thinking and behavioural changes in response to climate change (Myers et al,
2012; Smith and Leiserowitz, 2014; Feldman and Hart, 2016; Feldman and Hart, 2018; Prescott and Logan, 2018; Section 1.8.3).

Much ofthe adaptation andresilience literature published since AR5 highlights the need for transformations that enable effective climate
change mitigation (most notably, to decarbonise the economy) (Riahi et al., 2017), and support adaptation (e.g., Pelling et al., 2015;
Few et al. 2017). Transformation becomes particularly relevant when existing mitigation and adaptation practices cannot reduce risks
and impacts to an acceptable level. Transformative adaptation, therefore, involves fundamental modifications of policies, policy making
processes, institutions, human behaviour and cultural values (Pelling et al, 2015; Solecki et al., 2017). Successful transformation
requires attention to conditions that allow for such changes, including timing (e.g., windows of opportunity), social readiness (e.g.,
some level of willingness) and resources to act (e.g., trust, human skill and financial resources; Kofinas et al., 2013; Moore et al., 2014).
Examples related to SROCC include shifting from a paradigm of protection reliant on seawalls to living with saltwater as a response
to coastal flooding in rural areas (Renaud et al.,, 2015) or involving fundamental risk management changes in coastal megacdities,
including retreat (Solecki et al., 2017). Transformation in changing ocean and cryosphere contexts can be fostered by transdisciplinary
collaboration between actors in science, government, the private sector, civil society and affected communities (Padmanabhan, 2017;
Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1; Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 1).

1.5.1 Hazards and Opportunities for Natural Systems,

Ecosystems, and Human Systems

Hazards faced by marine and coastal organisms, and the ecosystem
services they provide are generally dependent on future greenhouse
gas emission pathways, with moderate likelihood under a
low-emission future, but high to very high likelihood under higher
emission scenarios (very high confidence) (Mora et al., 2013; Gattuso
et al, 2015). Hazards to marine ecosystems assessed in ARS (IPCC,
2014) included degradation of coral reefs (high confidence), ocean
deoxygenation (medium confidence) and ocean acidification (high
confidence). Shifts in the ranges of plankton and fish were identified
with high confidence regionally, but with uncertain trends globally.

90

SROCC provides more evidence for global shifts in the distribution of
marine organisms, and in how the phenology of animals is responding
to ocean change (Sections 3.2.3, 5.2). The signature of climate
change is now detected in almost all marine ecosystems. Similar
trends of changing habitat due to dimate change are reported for
the cryosphere (Sections 2.2, 3.4.3.2). The risk of irreversible loss of
many marine and coastal ecosystems increases with global warming,
especially at 2°C or more (high confidence; IPCC, 2018). Risk also
increases for habitat displacements, both poleward (Section 3.2.4)
and to greater ocean depths (Section 5.2.4), or habitat reductions,
such as that caused by glacier retreat (Section 2.2.3).
Framing and Context of the Report

Changes in the ocean and cryosphere bring hazards that affect the
health, wellbeing, safety and security of populations in coastal,
mountain and polar environments (Section 2.3.5, 3.4.3, 4.3.2). Some
impacts are direct, such as sea level rise or coastal erosion that can
displace coastal residents (4.3.2.3, 4.4.2.6, Box 4.1). Other effects are
indirect; for example, rising ocean temperatures have led to increases
in maximum wind speed and rainfall rates in tropical cyclones
(Section 6.3), creating hazards with severe consequences for natural
and human systems (Sections 4.3, 6.2, 6.3, 6.8). The multiple category
4 and 5 Atlantic hurricanes in 2017 caused the loss of over 3300 lives
and more than 350 billion USD in economic damages (Cross-Chapter
Box 9; Andrade et al., 2018; Murakami et al., 2018; NOAA, 2018). In
mountain regions, glacial lake outburst floods have caused severe
impacts on lives, livelihoods and infrastructure that often extend
beyond the directly affected areas (Section 2.3.2 and 6.2.2). Some
hazards related to ocean and cryosphere change involve abrupt
and irreversible changes (Section 1.3), which generate sometimes
unpredictable risks, and multiple hazards can coincide to greatly
elevate the total risk (Section 6.8.2). For example, combinations of
thawing permafrost, sea level rise, loss of sea ice, ocean surface waves
and extreme weather events (Thomson and Rogers, 2014; Ford et al.
2017) have damaged Arctic infrastructure (e.g., buildings, roads)
(AMAP 2015; AMAP 2017), impacted reindeer husbandry livelihoods
for Sami and other Arctic Indigenous peoples and impeded access to
hunting ground, other communities and travel routes fundamental
to the livelihoods, food security and wellbeing of Inuit and other
Northern cultures (Section 3.4.3). In some Arctic regions, tipping
points may have already been reached such that adaptive practices
can no longer work (Section 3.5).

Climate change impacts on the ocean and cryosphere can also
present opportunities, in at least the near- and medium-term. For
example, in Nepal warming of high mountain environments and
accelerated melting of snow and ice have extended the growing
season and crop yields in some regions (Section 2.3; Gaire et al.
2015; Merrey et al, 2018), while tourism and shipping has increased
in the Arctic with loss of sea ice (Section 3.2.4). Moreover, rising
ocean temperatures redistribute the global fish population, allowing
new fishing opportunities while reducing some established fisheries
(Bell et al., 2011; Fenichel et al, 2016; Section 5.4). To gain from new
opportunities, while also avoiding or mitigating new or increasing
hazards, it is necessary to be aware of trade-offs between risks and
benefits to understand who is and is not benefiting. For example,
opportunities can involve trade-offs with mitigation and/or SDGs
(Section 3.5.2), and the balance of economic costs and benefits may
differ substantially between the near-term and long-term future
(Section 5.4.2.2).

1.5.2 Exposure of Natural Systems, Ecosystems,

and Human Systems

Exposure to hazards in cryosphere systems occur in the immediate
vicinity of cryosphere components, and at regional to global scales
where cryosphere changes link to other natural systems. For example,
decreasing Arctic sea ice increases exposure for organisms that depend
upon habitats provided by sea ice, but also has far-reaching impacts

Chapter 1

through the resulting direct albedo feedback and amplification of
Arctic climate warming (e.g. Pistone et al, 2014) that then locally
increases surface melting of the Greenland ice sheet (Liu et al., 2016;
Stroeve et al., 2017). Additionally, ice loss from ice sheets contribute
to the global-scale exposure of sea level rise, and more local-scale
modifications and losses of coastal habitats and ecosystems (Sections
3.2.3 and4.3.3.5).Interactions within and between natural systems also
influence the spatial reach of risks associated with cryosphere change.
Permafrost degradation, for example, interacts with ecosystems and
climate on various spatial and temporal scales, and feedbacks from
these interactions range from local impacts on topography, hydrology
and biology, to global-scale impacts via biogeochemical cycling (e.g.,
methane release) on climate (Sections 2.2, 2.3, 3.4; Kokelj et al., 2015;
Grosse et al., 2016).

Exposure to climate change risk exists for virtually all coastal
organisms, habitats and ecosystems (Section 5.2), through processes
such as inundation and salinisation (Section 4.3), ocean acidification
and deoxygenation (Sections 3.2.3, 5.2.3), increasing marine
heatwaves (Section 6.4.1.2), and increases in harmful algal blooms
and invasive species (Glibert et al., 2014; Gobler et al., 2017; Townhill
et al., 2017; Box 5.3). Aggregate impacts of multiple drivers are
dramatically altering ecosystem structure and function in the coastal
and open ocean (Boyd et al. 2015; Deutsch et al., 2015; Przeslawski
et al, 2015), such as coral reefs under increasing pressure from both
rising ocean temperature and acidification (Section 5.3.4). Increasing
exposure to climate change hazards in open ocean natural systems
includes ocean acidification (O'Neill et al, 2017; Section 5.2.3),
changes in ocean ventilation, deoxygenation (Shepherd et al., 2017;
Breitburg et al., 2018; Section 5.2.2.4), increased cyclone and flood
risk (Section 6.3.3) and an increase in extreme El Niño and La Niña
events (Section. 6.5.1). Heat content is rapidly increasing within the
ocean (Section 5.2.2) and marine heat waves are becoming more
frequent across the world ocean (Section 6.4.1).

People who live close to the ocean and/or cryosphere, or depend
directly on their resources for livelihoodbs, are particularly exposed to
climate change impacts and hazards (very high confidence) (Barange
et al, 2014 Romero-Lankao et al, 2014; AMAP, 2015). These
exposures can result in infrastructure damage and failure (Sections
23.133, 3.433, 3.5, 4.3.2), loss of habitability (Sections 2.3.7, 3.4.3,
3.5, 4.3.3), changes in air quality (Section 6.5.2), proliferation of
disease vectors (Sections 3.4.3.2.2, 5.4.2.1.1), increased morbidity
and mortality due to injury, infectious disease, heat stress, and mental
health and wellness challenges (Section 3.4.3.3), compromised food
and water security (Sections 2.3.1, 3.4.3.3, 4.3.3.6, 5.4.2.1, 6.8.4),
degradation of ecosystem services (Sections 2.3.1.2, 2.3.3.4, 4.3.3,
5.4.1, 6.4.2.3), economic and non-economic impacts due to reduced
production and social network system disruption (Section 2.3.7),
conflict (Sections 2.3.1.14, 3.5) and widespread human migration
(Sections 2.3.7, 4.4.3.5; Oppenheimer et al., 2014; van Ruijven et al.
2014; AMAP 2015; Cunsolo and Ellis, 2018).

This report documents how people residing in coastal and cryosphere
regions are already exposed to climate change hazards, and which
of these hazards are projected to increase in the future. For example,
mountain communities have been exposed to increased rockfall, rock

91

 
 

Chapter 1

avalanches and landslides due to permafrost degradation and glacier
shrinkage, and to changes in snow avalanche type and seasonal
timing (Section 2.3.1). Cryosphere changes that can impact water
availability in mountain regions and for downstream populations
(Sections 2.3.1, 2.3.4, 2.3.5) have implications for drinking water,
irrigation, livestock grazing, hydropower production and tourism
(Section 2.3). Some declining mountain glaciers hold sacred and
symbolic meanings for local communities who will experience
spiritual losses (Section 2.3.4, 2.3.5, and 2.3.6). Exposures to
extreme warming, and continued sea ice and permafrost loss in the
Arctic, challenge Indigenous communities with close interdependent
relationships of economy, lifestyles, cultural identity, self-sufficiency,
Indigenous knowledge, health and wellbeing with the Arctic
cryosphere (Section 3.4.3, 3.5).

The population living in low elevation coastal zones (land less than
10 m above sea level) is projected to increase to more than one
billion by 2050 (Section 4.3.2.2). These people and communities are
particularly exposed to future sea level rise, rising ocean temperature
(including marine heat waves; Section 6.4), enhanced coastal erosion,
increasing wind, wave height, storm intensity and ocean acidification
(Section 4.3.4). These exposures bring associated risks for livelihoods
linked to fisheries, tourism and trade, as well as loss of life, damaged
assets, and disruption of basic services including safe water supplies,
sanitation, energy and transportation networks (Chapters 4, 5, and 6;
Cross-Chapter Box 9).

1.5.3  Vulnerabilities in Natural Systems, Ecosystems,

and Human Systems

Directandindirectrisks tonaturalsystemsareinfluenced by vulnerability
to climate change as well as deterioration of ecosystem services. For
example, about half of species assessed on the northeast United States
continental shelf exhibited high to very high climate vulnerability due
to temperature preferences and changes in habitat space (Hare et al.
2016), with corresponding northward range shifts for many species
{Kleisner et al, 2017) and increased vulnerability for organisms or
ecosystems unable to migrate or evolve at the rate required to adapt
to ocean and cryosphere changes (Miller et al., 2018). Non-climatic
pressures also magnify the vulnerability of ocean and cryosphere
ecosystems to dimate-related changes, such as overfishing, coastal
development, and pollution, including plastic pollution (Halpern et al.
2008; Halpern et al., 2015; IPBES, 2018a; IPBES, 2018b; IPBES, 2018c;
IPBES, 2018d). Conventional (fossil fuel-based) plastics produced in
2015 accounted for 3.8% of global CO2 emissions and could reach up
to 15% by 2050 (Zheng and Suh, 2019).

The vulnerability of mountain, Arctic and coastal communities is
affected by social, political, historical, cultural, economic, institutional,
environmental, geographical and/or demographic factors such as
gender, age, race, class, caste, Indigeneity and disability (Thomas et al.
2019; Sections 2.3.6 and 3.5; Cross-Chapter Box 9). Disparities and
inequities in such factors may result in social exclusion, inequalities
and non-dimatic challenges to health and wellbeing, economic
development and basic human rights (Adger et al., 2014; Olsson
et al. 2014; Smith et al., 2014). Those less advantaged often also have

92

Framing and Context of the Report

reduced access to and control over the social, financial, technological
and environmental resources that are required for adaptation and
transformation (Oppenheimer et al., 2014; AMAP 2015), thus limiting
options for coping and adapting to change (Hijioka et al, 2014).
However, even populations with greater wealth and privilege can be
vulnerable to some climate change risks (Cardona et al., 2012; Smith
et al., 2014), especially if sources of wealth and wellbeing depend
upon established infrastructure that is poorly suited to ocean or
cryosphere change.

Institutions and governance can shape vulnerability and adaptive
capadty, and it can be challenging for weak governance structures to
respond effectively to extreme or persistent climate change hazards
(Sections 6.4 and 6.9; Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1; Berrang-Ford
et al, 2014; Hijioka et al, 2014). Furthermore, populations can be
negatively impacted by inappropriate climate change mitigation
and/or adaptation policies, particularly ones that further marginalise
their knowledge, culture, values and livelihoods (Field et al, 2014;
Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 1).

Vulnerability is not static in place and time, nor homogeneously
experienced.The vulnerabilities of individuals, groups, and populations
to climate change is dynamic and diverse, and reflects changing
societal and environmental conditions (Thomas et al., 2019). SROCC
examines vulnerability following the conceptual definition presented
in Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1, and vulnerability in human
systems is treated in relative rather than absolute terms.

1.6 Addressing the Causes and
Consequences of Climate Change

for the Ocean and Cryosphere

Effective and ambitious mitigation of climate change would be required
to meet the temperature goal of the Paris Agreement (UNFCCC, 2015;
IPCC, 2018). Similarly, effective and ambitious adaptation to climate
change impacts on the ocean and cryosphere is necessary to enable
CRDPS that minimise residual risk, and loss and damage (very high
confidence; Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1; IPCC, 2018). Mitigation
refers to human actions to limit climate change by reducing the
emissions and enhancing the sinks of greenhouse gases. Adaptation
refers to processes of adjustment by natural or human systems to actual
or expected climate and its effects, intended to moderate harm or
exploit beneficial opportunities. The presidency of the 23rd Conference
Of the Parties of United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) introduced the oceans pathway into the climate
solution space, acknowledging both the importance of the ocean in
the dimate system and that ocean commitments for adaptation and
mitigation are available through Nationally Determined Contributions
under the UNFCCC (Gallo et al., 2017).

1.6.1 Mitigation and Adaptation Options

in the Ocean and Cryosphere

Mitigation and adaptation pathways to avoid dangerous
anthropogenic interference with the climate system (United Nations,
Framing and Context of the Report

Chapter 1

 

 

 

 
    
 

 

 

 
  

 

Renewable energy o— Pollution Assisted  Restoration and 16 + ES
reduction Conservation evolution  enhancement p
Increase energy efficiency @——
. . 2 5,6 3-6 5 5
Reduce atmospheric pollution @—— 2-6, © Infrastructure-based
. . . adaptation
Supporting biological
Carbon capture and storage @— and ecological adaptation
Direct air CO, capture ©
and storage d 2,4-6,* e Relocate and diversify
Bioenergy with carbon S— economic activities
capture and storage Addressing the at Enhancing
Biochar and soil carbon @— causes of EAU »- societal
climate change actions adaptation 2 4 6*
Restore and increase e 5 É———@ Relocate people
coastal vegetation
Enhance open-ocean © 5
productivity
Enhanced weathering and © 5 3,4-6,* e Change practices
alkalinization and policies

@- Mitigation (reducing sources of GHG)
1-6 = SROCC chapters

©- Mitigation (increasing sinks of GHG)
*%= SROCC Integrative Cross-Chapter Box 9

@-Aceptation

Figure 1.2 | Overview of the main ocean-cryosphere mitigation and adaptation measures to observed and expected changes in the context of this report. A longer
description of these measures are given in SM1.3. Solar radiation management techniques are omitted because they are covered in other IPCC &th Assessment Report (AR6)
products. Governance and enabling conditions are implicitly embedded in all mitigation and adaptation measures. Some governance-based measures (e.q. institutional
arrangements) are not included in this figure but are covered in Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1 and in Chapters 2 to 6. GHG: greenhouse gases. Modified from Gattuso

et al. (2018).

1992) are considered in SR15 (IPCC, 2018). SROCC assesses
several ocean and cryosphere-specific measures for mitigation and
adaptation including options for to address the causes of dimate
change, support biological and ecological adaptation, and enhance
societal adaptation (Figure 1.2). Other measures have been proposed,
induding solar radiation management and several other forms of
carbon dioxide removal, but these are not addressed in SROCC as
they are covered in other products of the IPCC Sixth Assessment
Cyde (SR15 and AR6 Working Group 111) and are outside the scope of
SROCC. SROCC does assess indirect mitigation measures that involve
the ocean and the cryosphere (Figure 1.2) by supporting biological
and ecological adaptation, such as through reducing nutrient and
organic carbon pollution (which moderates ocean acidification in
eutrophied areas) and conservation (which preserves biodiversity
and habitats) in coastal regions (Billé et al., 2013).

A literature-based expert assessment shows that ocean-related
mitigation measures have trade-offs, with the greatest benefits
derived by combining global and local measures (high confidence;
Gattuso et al. 2018). Local measures, such as pollution reduction and
conservation, provide significant co-benefits and few adverse side
effects (high confidence; Sections 5.5.1, 5.5.2). They can be relatively
rapidly implemented, but are generally less effective in addressing
the global problem (high confidence; Sections 5.5.1, 5.5.2). Likewise,
local efforts to decrease air pollution near mountain glaciers and
other cryosphere components, for example reducing black carbon
emissions, can bring regional-scale benefits for health and in reducing
snow and ice-melt (Shindell et al., 2012; Box 2.2).

Well-chosen human interventions can enhance the adaptive capacity
of natural systems to dimate change. Such interventions through
manipulating an ecosystem's structural or functional properties
(e.g., restoration of mangroves) may minimise climate change
pressures, enhance natural resilience and/or re-direct ecosystem
responses to reduce cascading risks on societies. In human systems,
adaptation can involve both infrastructure (eg. enhanced sea
defences) and community-based action (eg. changes in policies
and practices). Adaptation options to ongoing climate change are
most effective when considered together with mitigation strategies
because there are limits to effective adaptation, mitigation actions
can make adaptation more difficult, and some adaptation measures
may increase greenhouse gas emissions.

Adaptation and mitigation decisions are connected with economic
concerns. In SROCC, two main economic approaches are used. The
first comprises the Total Economic Value method and the valuation
of ecosystem services. SROCC considers the paradigm of sustainable
development, and the linkages between climate impacts on ecosystem
services (Section 5.4.1) and the consequences on SDGs including food
security or poverty eradication (Section 5.4.2). The second economic
approach used are formal decision analysis methods, which help to
identify options (also called alternatives) that perform best or well
with regards to given objectives. These methods indude cost-benefit
analysis, multi-criteria analysis and robust decision-making and are
specifically relevant for appraising long-term investment decisions in
the context of coastal adaptation (Section 4.4.4.6).

93

 
 

Chapter 1

1.6.2 Adaptation in Natural Systems, Ecosystems,

and Human Systems

In AR, a range of changes in ocean and cryosphere natural systems
were linked with medium to high confidence to pressures associated
with climate change (Cramer et al., 2014). Climate change impacts
on natural ecosystems are variable in space and time. The multiplicity
of pressures these natural systems experience impedes attribution
of population or ecosystem responses to a specific ocean and/or
cryosphere change. Moreover, the interconnectivity of populations
within ecosystems means that a single ‘adaptive response’ of a
population, or the aggregate response of an ecosystem (the adaptive
responses of the interconnected populations), is influenced not just
by direct pressures of climate change, but occurs in concert with
the adaptive responses of other species in the ecosystem, further
complicating efforts to disentangle specific patterns of adaptation.

Notwithstanding the network of pressures and adaptations, much
effort has gone into resolving the mechanisms, interactions and
feedbacks of natural systems associated with the ocean and
cryosphere. Chapters 4, 5 and 6, as well as Cross-Chapter Box 9,
assess new knowledge on the adaptive responses of wetlands,
coral reefs, other coastal habitats, and the populations of marine
organisms encountering ocean-based risks, including. Likewise,
Chapters 2 and 3 describe emerging knowledge on how ecosystems
in high-mountain and polar areas are adapting to cryosphere decline.

AR5 and SR15 have highlighted the importance of evolutionary
adaptation as a component of how populations adapt to climate
change pressures (eg. Pôrtner et al, 2014; Hoegh-Guldberg
et al, 2018). Acclimatisation (variation in morphology, physiology or
behaviour) can result from changes in gene expression but does not
involve change in the underlying DNA sequence. Responses related
to acclimatisation can occur both within single generations and over
several generations. In contrast, evolution requires changes in the
genetic composition of a population over multiple generations; for
example, by differential survival or fecundity of different genotypes
(Sunday et al, 2014). Adaptive evolution is the subset of evolution
attributable to natural selection, and natural selection may lead to
populations becoming more fit (Sunday et al., 2014) or extend the
range of environments where populations persist (van Oppen et al,
2015). The efficacy of natural selection is affected by population size
(Charlesworth, 2009), standing genetic variation, the ability of a
population to generate novel genetic variation, migration rates and
the frequency of genetic recombination (Rice, 2002). Many studies
have shown evolution of traits within and across life stages of
populations (Pespeni et al., 2013; Hinners et al., 2017), but there are
fewer studies on how evolutionary change can impact ecosystem or
community function, and whether trait evolution is stable (Schaum
and Collins, 2014). Although acclimatisation and evolutionary
adaptation are separate processes, they influence each other, and
both adaptive and maladaptive variation of traits can facilitate
evolution (Schaum and Collins, 2014; Ghalambor et al, 2015).
Natural evolutionary adaptation may be challenged by the speed and
magnitude of current ocean and cryosphere changes, but emerging
studies investigate how human actions may assist evolutionary
adaptation and thereby possibly enhance the resilience of natural

94

Framing and Context of the Report

systems to climate change pressures (e.g., Box 5.4 in Section 5.5.2).
Through acclimatisation and evolutionary adaptation to the pressures
from dimate change (and all other persistent pressures), populations,
species and ecosystems present a constantly changing context for
the adaptation of human systems to climate change.

There are several human adaptation options for dimate change
impacts on the ocean and cryosphere. Adaptive responses include
nature- and ecosystem-based approaches (Renaud et al. 2016; Serpetti
et al., 2017). Additionally, more social-based approaches for human
adaptation range from community-based and infrastructure-based
approaches to managed retreat, along with other forms of internal
migration (Black et al. 2011; Hino et al., 2017). Building on AR5 (Wong
et al., 2014), Chapter 4 describes four main modes of adaptation to
mean and extreme sea level rise: protect, advance, accommodate,
and retreat. This report demonstrates that all modes of adaptation
include mixes of institutional, individual, socio-cultural, engineering,
behavioural and/or ecosystem-based measures (e.g., Section 4.4.2).

The effectiveness and performance of different adaptation options
across spatial and social scales is influenced by their social
acceptance, political feasibility, cost-efficiency, co-benefits and
trade-offs (Jones et al., 2012; Adger et al., 2013; Eriksen et al., 2015).
Scientific evaluation of past successes and future options, including
understanding barriers, limits, risks and opportunities, are complex
and inadequately researched (Magnan and Ribera, 2016). In the end,
adaptation priorities will depend on multiple parameters including
the extent and rate of climate change, the risk attitudes and social
preferences of individuals and institutions (and the returns they may
gain) (Adger et al. 2009; Brügger et al., 2015; Evans et al., 2016; Neef
et al. 2018) and access to finances, technology, capacity and other
resources (Berrang-Ford et al., 2014; Eisenack et al., 2014).

Since AR, transformational adaptation (i.e., the need for fundamental
changes in private and publicinstitutions and flexible decision-making
processes to face climate change consequences) has been
increasingly studied (Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1). The recent
literature documents how societies, institutions, and/or individuals
increasingly assume a readiness to engage in transformative change,
via their acceptance and promotion of fundamental alterations
in natural or human systems (Klinsky et al., 2016). People living in
and near coastal, mountain and polar environments often pioneer
these types of transformations, since they are at the forefront of
ocean and cryosphere change (e.g., Solecki et al., 2017). Community
led and indigenous led adaptation research continues to burgeon
(Ayers and Forsyth, 2009; David-Chavez and Gavin, 2018), especially
in many mountain (Section 2.3.2.3), Arctic (Section 3.5), and
coastal (Section 4.4.4.4, 445.4, Cross-Chapter Box 9) areas,
and demonstrate potential for enabling transformational adaptation
(Dodman and Mitlin, 2013; Chung Tiam Fook, 2017). Similarly, the
concepts of scenario planning and ‘adaptation pathway’ design
have expanded since AR5, especially in the context of development
planning for coastal and delta regions (Section 4.4, Cross-Chapter
Box 9: Wise et al., 2014; Maier et al., 2016; Bloemen et al, 2018;
Flynn et al., 2018; Frame et al, 2018; Lawrence et al., 2018).
Framing and Context of the Report

1.7 Governance and Institutions

SROCC  conceptualises governance as deciding, managing,
implementing and monitoring policies in the context of ocean and
cryosphere change. Institutions are defined as formal and informal
social rules that shape human behaviour (Roggero et al., 2017).
Governance guides how different actors negotiate, mediate their
interests and share their rights and responsibilities (Forino et al,
2015; See SROCC Annex l: Glossary and Cross-Chapter Box 3 in
Chapter 1 for definition). Governance and institutions interface with
climate and social-ecological change process across local, regional
and global scales (Fischer et al., 2015; Pahl-Wostl, 2019).

SROCC explores how the interlinked social-ecological systems affect
challenge current governance systems in the context of ocean and
cryosphere change. These challenges include three aspects. First,
the scale of changes to ocean and cryosphere properties driven by
global warming, and in the ecosystems they support and services
they provide, are poorly matched to existing scales of governance
(Sections 2.2.2.1; 2.3.1.3; 3.2.1; 3.5.3). Second, the nature of changes
in ecosystem services resulting from changes in ocean and cryosphere
properties, including services provided to humans living far from the
mountains and coasts, are poorly matched to existing institutions
and processes of governance (Section 4.4.4). Third, many possible
governance responses to these challenges could be of limited or
diminished effectiveness unless they are coordinated on scales
beyond that of currently available governance options (Section 6.9.2;
Box 5.5).

Hydrological processes in the high mountain cryosphere connect
through upstream and downstream areas of river basins (Molden
et al, 2016; Chen et al, 2018), including floodplains and deltaic
regions (Kilroy, 2015; Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1). These cross
boundary linkages challenge local-scale governance and institutions

Chapter 1

that determine how the river-based ecosystem services that sustain
food, water and energy are used and distributed (Rasul, 2014; Warner,
2016; Lele et al., 2018; Pahl-Wostl et al., 2018). Small Island States
face rising seas that threaten habitability of their homeland and the
possibility of losing their nation-state, cultural identity and voices
in international governance (Gerrard and Wannier 2013; Philip,
2018; Section 1.4, Cross-Chapter Box 9), highlighting the need for
transboundary components to governance.

These governance challenges cannot be met without working across
multiple organisations and institutions, bringing varying capacities,
frameworks and spatial extents (Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1).
Progress in governance for ocean and cryosphere change will require
filling gaps in legal frameworks (Amsler, 2016), aligning spatial
mismatches (Eriksen et al., 2015; Young, 2016; Cosens et al., 2018),
improving the ability for nations to cooperate effectively (Downie
and Williams, 2018; Hall and Persson, 2018) and integrating across
divided policy domains, most notably of dimate change adaptation
and disaster risk reduction (e.g., where slow sea level change also
alters the implications for civil defense planning and the management
of extreme events; Mysiak et al., 2018).

Harmonising local, regional and global governance structures would
provide an overarching policy framework for action and allocation
of necessary resources for adaptation. Coordinating the top-down
and bottom-up governance processes (Bisaro and Hinkel, 2016; Sabel
and Victor, 2017; Homsy et al, 2019) to increase effectiveness of
responses, mobilise and equitably distribute adequate resources and
access private and public sector capabilities requires a polycentric
approach to governance (Ostrom, 2010; Jordan et al, 2015).
Polycentric governance connotes a complex form of governance with
multiple centres of decision making working with some degree of
autonomy (Carlisle and Gruby, 2017; Baldwin et al., 2018; Mewhirter
et al., 2018; Hamilton and Lubell, 2019).

Cross-Chapter Box 3 | Governance of the Ocean, Coasts and the Cryosphere

under Climate Change

 

Authors: Anjal Prakash (Nepal/India), Sandra Cassotta (Denmark), Bruce Glavovic (New Zealand/South Africa), Jochen Hinkel
(Germany), Elisabeth Holland (Fiji/USA), Md Saiful Karim (Australia/Bangladesh), Ben Orlove (USA), Beate Ratter (Germany), Jake Rice
(Canada), Evelia Rivera-Arriaga (Mexico), Catherine Sutherland (South Africa)

This Cross-Chapter Box outlines governance and associated institutional challenges and emerging solutions relevant to the ocean,
coasts and cryosphere in a changing climate. It illustrates these through three cases: (Case 1) multi-level interactions in Ocean and
Arctic governance; (Case 2) mountain governance; and (Case 3) coastal risk governance. Governance refers to how political, social,
economic and environmental systems and their interactions are governed or ‘steered” by establishing and modifying institutional and
organisational arrangements which regulate social processes, mitigate conflicts and realise mutual gains (North, 1990; Pierre and
Peters, 2000; Paavola, 2007). Institutions are formal and informal rules and norms, constructed and held in common by social actors
that guide, constrain and shape human interactions (North, 1990; Ostrom, 2005). Formal institutions include constitutions, laws,
policies and contracts, while informal institutions include customs, social norms and taboos. Both administrative or state government
structures and indigenous or traditional governance structures govern the ocean, coasts and cryosphere.

Understanding governance in a changing climate

The Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC), together with the Special Report on Global
Warming of 1.5°C (SR15) (IPCC, 2018), highlights the critical role of governance in implementing effective dimate adaptation.
Chapter 2 explores local community institutions offering autonomous adaptation in the Alps, Andes, Himalayas and other mountain

95
 

Chapter 1 Framing and Context of the Report

Cross-Chapter Box 3 (continued)

 

 

 

 

Contiguous Zone

,  24naufical miles

Zone
eritorial

Sp”

k

   
  

e.g. Marine
Protected Areas

Territorial 100 nautical miles from the 2500 metres isobath . Polar
Sea Baseline % g Ô govemance

à or 200 nautical miles » … 1_ The High Seas . , agreements |

1 an F PR >
D ll 0 !
Ô 09 1 Obligation to protect and ©:
Mountain Interal : Territorial _ I Extended imanage the marine environment |
River Basin Waters | Sea Continental Shelf pe Corinental Self | |
1 42 nautical : | _claimable to a maximum The Area O |
\_ miles "Exclusive Economic Zone of 360 nautical miles or ù
+ É >! 100 nautical miles from the i
il 1
D 1
!
!
!
!
!

U

!
|
1 2500 meter isobath Exclusive Economic
à

!

!

!

!

     

e.g. Offshore SE

Giire EE UT

e.g. fishing
Case study 2: Case study 3: A Case study 1:
Gilgit-Baltistan Cape Town ee Pen  -| Arctic Council
Pakistan South Africa DLL Se limited). Mulé-level
Communal tenure Seashore as interactions

arrangements a public asset and synergies
over shared assets Deep Seabed in governance

CRETE ES EE
Continental Rise cable Ne

Public-Private Interactions LOGE EMILE

 

Sovereignty, Exclu
ani xclusive
sovereign rights and Internal Archipelagic Territorial Economic Continental High Seas
freedoms in marine zones Waters Waters Sea Zone Shelf
Navigation Ô _ o

Overilight

 

°

Laying of submarine
cable and pipelines

 

D
S

=

D
+ I!
D

=

>

Constructing artificial
islands and other installations

 

 

Fishing e

Exploration and exploitation
of non-living resources

 

 

Marine scientific reasearch

00000
6006
6006

Protection of the Obligation —_—

marine environment

O- sovereignty @ = sovereign rights ©- Jurisdiction © = innocent passage Q@ = Archipelagic sea lane passage

= freedom as referred to Art. 87 (‘Freedom of the High Seas”) ©Q- International Seabed Authority

 

6000000066
00000066

°

Figure CB3.1 | Spatial distribution of multi-faceted governance arrangements for the ocean, coasts and cryosphere (Panel A) sovereignty, sovereign rights,
jurisdictions and freedoms defined for different ocean zones and sea by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) (Panel B). Figure CB3.1 is
designed to be illustrative and is not comprehensive of all govermance arrangements for the ocean, coasts and cryosphere.

96
Framing and Context of the Report Chapter 1

Cross-Chapter Box 3 (continued)

regions (Section 2.4), focusing on the need for transboundary cooperation to support water governance and mitigate conflict. Chapter 3
explores how polar governance system facilitate building resilient pathways, knowledge co-production, social learning, adaptation
and power-sharing with Indigenous Peoples at the regional level. This would help in increasing international cooperation in multi-level
governance arenas to strengthen responses supporting adaptation in socio-ecological systems (Section 3.5.4). Chapter 4 illustrates
how sea level rise governance attempts to address conflicting interests in coastal development, risk management and adaptation with
a diversity of governance contexts and degrees of community participation, with a focus on equity concerns and inevitable trade-offs
(Section 4.4). Chapter 5 includes a review of existing international legal regimes for addressing ocean warming, acidification and
deoxygenation impacts on social-ecological systems and considers ways to facilitate appropriate responses to ocean change (Sections
5.4, 5.5). Chapter 6 explores the issues of credibility, trust, and reliability in government that arise from promoting ‘paying the costs of
preparedness and prevention” as an alternative to ‘bearing the costs of loss and damage’ (Section 6.9).

 

Climate change challenges existing governance arrangements in a variety of ways. First, there are complex interconnections between
dimate change and other processes that influence the ocean, coasts and cryosphere, making it difficult to untangle climate governance
from other governance efforts. Second, the time frames for societal decision-making and government terms are mismatched with
the long-term commitment of climate change. Third, governance choices have to be made in the face of uncertainty about the
rate and scale of change that will occur in the medium to long-term (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1). Lastly, climate change
progressively alters the environment and hence requires continual innovation and adjustment of governance arrangements (Bisaro
and Hinkel, 2016; Roggero et al, 2018). Novel transboundary interactions and conflicts are emerging as well as new multi-level
governance structures for international and regional cooperation, strengthening shared decision-making among States and other
actors (Case 1). The prospects of ‘disappearing states’, glacier retreat and increasing water scarcity are resulting in States redefining
complex water-sharing agreements (Case 2). Coastal risk is escalating, which may require participatory governance responses and the
co-production of knowledge at the local scale (Case 3; see also Cross-Chapter Box 9).

Governance, exercised through legal, administrative and other social processes, is essential to prevent, mitigate and adapt to
the challenges and risks posed by à changing climate. These governance processes determine roles in the exercising of power
and hence decision-making (Graham et al, 2003). Governance may be an act of governments (e.g., passing laws or providing

 

 

 

Levels of
Governance MT
Global agreements
. LEA Cul
Regional FA :
a FA 5 Sub-regional
DE El Influence & Interactions
= ri E
. = n
National = D S a LEE CU
=|°l1s r
ARE FE Governance A ÊÉ
. S1sig| _ DS ofthe ocean, « . = 8
Provincial{ ® Ê SER E PCT ET Provincial or regional El ta
. Fe % 3
Sub-national SÉÉRA EÉ CITE CNT Ce EPrennne a E
SE ER E a changing SE É
alSslE= > Res n 5 =
81SIS| € 5 climate = £
Local AIRES = PT TC UT un
Civil society (the public)
institut Organisations Emerging Different configurations Traditional authority
MGrbalinsiiutions = ‘beyond the State’ EH govemance networks En ee D The State M igenous bodies

Figure CB3.2 | Interactions and emergence of network governance arrangements for the ocean, coasts and cryosphere across different scales. Adapted from
Sommerkorn and Nilsson (2015).

97
Chapter 1 Framing and Context of the Report

Cross-Chapter Box 3 (continued)

incentives or information such that citizens can respond more effectively to climate change); private sector actions (e.g., insurance);
a co-operative effort among local actors governing themselves through customary law (e.g., by establishing entitlements or norms
regulating the common use of scarce resources); a collaborative multi-level effort involving multiple actors (state, private and civil
society; e.g., UNFCCC); or a multi-national effort (e.g., Antarctic Treaty; see Figure CB3.2). The complexities of governance arrangements
in the ocean, coasts and cryosphere (Figure CB3.1), and the interactions and emergence of relationships between different governance
actors in multiple configurations across various spatial scales (Figure CB3.2) are illustrated below.

 

Case Study 1 — Multi-level Interactions and Synergies in Governance. The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and the
changing Arctic: Climate-change induced sea level rise (Section 4.2), could shift the boundaries and territory of some coastal states,
changing the areas where their coastal rights are applied under UNCLOS. In extreme cases, inundation from sea level rise might
lead to loss of territory and sovereignty, the disappearance of islands and the loss of international maritime jurisdiction subject to
maritime claim. These challenges have limited opportunities for recourse in international law and it remains unclear what adequate
responses from an international law perspective would be (Vidas et al, 2015; Andreone, 2017; Mayer and Crépeau, 2017; Chircop
et al, 2018). While specific legal arrangements and instruments of environmental protection are in place at a regional, sub-regional
and national level, they are insufficient to address the new challenges sea level rise brings. Institutional responses to the geopolitical
transformation caused by dimate change, such as through the Arctic Council (AC) and the ‘Law of the Sea’ are still evolving. Similar to
many international agreements, UNCLOS ‘Law of the Sea’ provisions for enforcement, compliance, monitoring and dispute settlement
mechanisms are not comprehensive, and commonly depend on further, detailed law-making by state parties, acting through competent
international organizations (Vidas, 2000; Karim, 2015; De Lucia, 2017; Grip, 2017). Shifts from traditional state-based practices of
international law to multi-level and informal governance structures that involve state and non-state actors (including Indigenous
Peoples) may address these challenges (medium confidence; Cassotta, 2012; Shadian, 2014; Young, 2016; Andreone, 2017). The AC is
a regionally focused governance structure blending new forms of formal and informal multi-level regional cooperation (Young, 2016).
The soft law mechanisms employed draw upon best available practice and standards from multiple knowledge systems (Cassotta and
Mazza, 2015; Pincus and Ali, 2015) in an attempt to respond to the ocean's global, trans-regional and national climate challenges
(Section 3.5.4.2). Reconfiguration and restructuring of the AC has been proposed in order to address emerging trans-regional and global
problems (high confidence; Baker and Yeager, 2015; Pincus and Ali, 2015; Young, 2016). Within the existing scope, the AC has amplified
the voice of Arctic people affected by the impacts of dimate change and mobilized action (Koivurova, 2016). The influence of actors
‘beyond the state’ is emerging (Figure CB3.2). However, the state retains its importance in tackling the new challenges produced by
climate change, as the role of international cooperation in UNCLOS and the Polar Regions demonstrates (Section 3.5.4.2). For example,
Article 234 (Ice-covered areas) and Article 197 of the UNCLOS Convention in protecting the marine environment, states that ‘States shall
cooperate on a global basis and, as appropriate, on a regional basis [...] taking into account characteristic regional features’.

Case Study 2 — Mountain Governance: Water management in Gilgit-Baltistan, Pakistan. Gilgit-Baltistan is an arid territory
in a mountainous region of northern Pakistan. Melt water fed streams supply irrigation water for rural livelihoods (Nüsser and
Schmidt, 2017). The labour intensive work of constructing and maintaining gravity-fed irrigation canals is done by jirga, traditional
community associations. As glaciers retreat due to climate change, water sources at the edge of glaciers have been impacted, reducing
water available for irrigation. In response, villagers constructed new channels accessing more distant water for irrigation needs
(Parveen et al. 2015). The Aga Khan Development Network supported this substantial task by providing funding and developing a new
kind of cross-scale governance network, drawing on local residents for staff (Walter, 2014), and strengthening community resources,
training and networks. Challenges remain, including the potential for increased rainfall causing landslides that could damage new
canals, and possible expansion of Pakistan's hydropower infrastructure that would further diminish water resources and displace
villages (Shaïkh et al., 2015). On a geopolitical scale, decreased water supplies from the glaciers could exacerbate tensions over water
resources in the region, impacting water management in many parts of the Indus watershed (Uprety and Salman, 2011; Jamir, 2016;
see Section 2.3.1.4 for details).

Case Study 3 — Coastal Governance: Risk management for sea level changes in the City of Cape Town, South Africa. Sea level
rise and coastal flooding are the focus of the City of Cape Town's coastal climate adaptation efforts. The Milnerton coastline High
Water Mark, a non-static line marking the high tide, is creating a governance conflict by moving landwards (due to sea level rise)
and intersecting with private property boundaries, threatening public beaches and the dune cordon and placing private property
and municipal infrastructure at risk in storm conditions (Sowman et al, 2016). Private property owners are using a mixture
of formal, ad hoc, and in some cases illegal, coastal barrier measures to protect their assets from sea level and storm risks, but
these are creating additional erosion impacts on the coastline. Legally, the City of Cape Town is not responsible for remediating

98
Framing and Context of the Report Chapter 1

Cross-Chapter Box 3 (continued)

private land impacted by coastal erosion (Smith et al., 2016). However, dity officials feel compelled to take action for the common good
using a progressive, multi-stakeholder participatory approach. This involves opening up opportunities for dialogue and co-producing
knowledge, instead of a purely legalistic and state-centric compliance approach (Colenbrander et al, 2015). The city's actions are
both mindful of international frameworks on climate change and responsive to national and provincial legislation and policy. À major
challenge that remains is how to navigate the power struggles that will be triggered by this consultative process, as different actors
define and negotiate their interests, roles and responsibilities (see Section 4.4.3; Table 4.9).

 

Conclusions

These cases illustrate four important points. First, new governance challenges are emerging due to climate change, including; disruptions
to long-established cultures, livelihoods and even territorial sovereignty (Case 1); changes in the accessibility and availability of vital
resources (Case 2); and the blurring of public and private boundaries of risk and responsibility through accelerated coastal erosion
(Case 3; Figure CB3.1). Second, new governance arrangements are emerging to address these challenges, including participatory and
networked structures linking formal and informal networks, and involving state, private sector, indigenous and civil society actors in
different configurations (Figure CB3.2). Third, dimate governance is a complex, contested and unfolding process, with governance
actors and networks having to learn from experience, to innovate and develop context-relevant arrangements that can be adjusted
in the face of ongoing change. Lastly, there is no single climate governance panacea for the ocean, coasts and cryosphere. Empirical
evidence on which governance arrangements work well in which context is still limited, but ‘good governance’ norms indicate the
importance of inclusivity, fairness, deliberation, reflexivity, responsiveness, social learning, the co-production of knowledge and

respect for ethnic and cultural diversity.

1.8 Knowledge Systems for Understanding

and Responding to Change

Assessments of how dimate change interacts with the planet and
people are largely based on scientific knowledge from observations,
theories, modelling and synthesis to understand physical and
ecological systems (Section 1.8.1), societies (e.g., Cross-Chapter Box 2
in Chapter 1, Section 1.5) and institutions (e.g., Cross-Chapter Box 3
in Chapter 1). However, humans integrate information from multiple
sources to observe and interact with their environment, respond to
changes, and solve problems. Accordingly, SROCC also recognises
the importance of Indigenous knowledge and local knowledge in
understanding and responding to changes in the ocean and cryosphere
(Sections 1.8.2, 1.8.3; Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 1).

1.8.1 Scientific Knowledge

1.8.1.1 Ocean and Cryosphere Observations

Long-term sustained observations are critical for detecting and
understanding the processes of ocean and cryosphere change (Rhein
et al, 2013; Vaughan et al, 2013). Scientific knowledge of the ocean
and cryosphere has increased through time and geographical space
(Figure 1.3). /n situ ocean subsurface temperature and salinity
observations have increased in spatial and temporal coverage
since the middle of the 19th century (Abraham et al, 2013), and
near global coverage (60°S-60°N) of the upper 2,000 m has been
achieved since 2007 due to the international Argo network (Riser
et al., 2016; Figure 1.3). Improved data quality and data analysis
techniques have reduced uncertainties in global ocean heat uptake
estimates (Sections 1.4.1, 5.2.2). In addition to providing deep ocean

measurements, repeated hydrographic physical and biogeochemical
observations since AR5 have led to improved estimates of ocean
carbon uptake and ocean deoxygenation (Sections 1.4.1, 5.2.2.3,
52.24). Targeted observational programmes have improved
scientific knowledge for specific regions and physical processes of
particular concern in a warming climate, including the Greenland and
West Antarctic ice sheets (Section 3.3), and the AMOC (Section 6.7).
Ocean and cryosphere mass changes and sea level studies have
benefited from sustained or newly implemented satellite-based
remote sensing technologies, complemented by in situ data such as
tide gauges measurements (Sections 3.3, 4.2; Dowell et al, 2013;
Raup et al, 2015; PSMSL, 2016). Glacier length measurements in
some locations go back many centuries (Figure 1.3), but it is the
systematic high resolution satellite monitoring of a large number of
the world's glaciers since the late 1970s that has improved global
assessments of glacier mass loss (Sections 2.2.3, 3.3.2).

Limitations in knowledge of ocean and cryosphere change remain,
creating knowledge gaps for the SROCC assessment. Ocean and
cryosphere datasets are frequently short, and do not always span
the key IPCC assessment time intervals (Cross-Chapter Box 1 in
Chapter 1), so for many parameters the full magnitude of changes
since the pre-industrial period is not observed (Figure 1.3). The
brevity of ocean and cryosphere measurements also means that
some expected changes cannot yet be detected with confidence in
direct observations (e.g., Antarctic sea ice loss in Section 3.2.1, AMOC
weakening in Section 6.7.1), or other observed changes cannot yet be
robustly attributed to anthropogenic factors (e.g., ice sheet mass loss
in Section 3.3.1). Observations for many key ocean variables (Bojinski
et al, 2014), such as ocean currents, surface heat fluxes, oxygen,
inorganic carbon, subsurface salinity, phytoplankton biomass and
diversity, etc., do not yet have global coverage or have not reached

99
 

Chapter 1

the required density or accuracy for detection of change. Some ocean
and cryosphere areas remain difficult to observe systematically,
for example, the ocean under sea ice, subsurface permafrost, high
mountain areas, marginal seas, coastal areas (Section 4.2.2.3)
and ocean boundary currents (Hu and Sprintall 2016), basin
interconnections (Section 6.6) and the Southern Ocean (Sections
32, 5.2.2). Measurements that reflect ecosystem change are often
location or species specific, and assessments of long-term ocean
ecosystem changes are currently only feasible for à limited subset
of variables, for example coral reef health (e.g., coral reef health)
(Section 5.3; Miloslavich et al., 2018). The deep ocean below 2,000 m
is still rarely observed (Talley et al., 2016), limiting (for example) the
accurate estimate of deep ocean heat uptake and, consequently the
full magnitude of Earth's energy imbalance (e.g., von Schuckmann
et al., 2016; Johnson et al., 2018; Sections 1.2, 1.4, 5.2.2).

1.8.1.2  Reanalysis Products

Advances have been made over the past decade in developing more
reliable and more highly resolved ocean and atmosphere reanalysis
products. Reanalysis products combine observational data with
numerical models through data assimilation to produce physically
consistent, and spatially complete ocean and climate products
(Balmaseda et al, 2015; Lellouche et al., 2018; Storto et al., 2018;
Zuo et al., 2018). Ocean reanalyses are widely used to understand
changes in physical properties (Section 3.2.1, 5.2), extremes
(Sections 6.3 to 6.6), circulation (Section 6.6, 6.7) and to provide
climate diagnostics (Wunsch et al., 2009; Balmaseda et al., 2013; Hu
and Sprintall, 2016; Carton et al., 2018). Reanalysis products are used
in SROCC for assessing climate change process that cause changes
in the ocean and cryosphere (e.g., Sections 2.2.1, 3.2.1, 3.3.1, 3.4.1,
5.2.2, 6.3.1, 6.6.1, 6.7.1). Improvements in reanalysis products
provide more realistic forcing for regional models, which are used
for assessing regional ocean and cryosphere changes that cannot be
resolved in global-scale models (e.g. Section 2.2.1; Mazloff et al,
2010; Fenty et al., 2017). The weather forecasts, and seasonal to
decadal predictions building on reanalysis products have important
applications in the early warning systems that reduce risk and aid
human adaptation to extreme events (Sections 6.3.4, 6.4.3, 6.53,
6.7.3, 6.8.5).

1.8.1.3 Model Simulation Data

Models are numerical approximations of the Earth system that allow
hypotheses about the mechanisms of ocean and cryosphere change
to be tested, support attribution of observed changes to specific
forcings (Section 1.3), and are the best available information for
assessing future change (Figure 1.3). General Circulation Models
(GCMs) typically simulate the atmosphere, ocean, sea ice, and land
surface, and sometimes also incorporate terrestrial and marine
ecosystems. Earth System Models (ESM) are climate models that
explicitly include the carbon cycle and may indude additional
components (e.g., atmospheric chemistry, ice sheets, dynamic
vegetation, nitrogen cycle, but also urban or crop models). The
systematic set of global-scale model experiments (Taylor et al., 2012)
used in SROCC were produced by CMIP5 (Cross-Chapter Box 1 in
Chapter 1), including both GCMs and ESMs.

100

Framing and Context of the Report

Models may differ in their spatial resolution, and in the extent
to which processes are expliditly represented or approximated
(parameterised). Model output can be biased due to uncertainties in
their physical equations or parameterisations, specification of initial
conditions, knowledge of external forcing factors, and unaccounted
processes and feedbacks (Hawkins and Sutton, 2009; Deser et al.
20712; Gupta et al., 2013; Lin et al., 2016). Since ARS there have been
advances in modelling the dynamical processes of the Greenland
and Antarctica ice sheets, leading to better representation of the
range of potential future sea level rise scenarios (Sections 4.2.3).
Downscaling, including the use of regional models, makes it possible
to improve the spatial resolution of model output in order to better
resolve past and future dimate change in specific areas, such as high
mountains and coastal seas (e.g., Sections 2.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.5.4, 4.22,
6.3.1). For biological processes, such as nutrient levels and organic
matter production, model uncertainty at regional scales is the main
issue limiting confidence in future projections (Sections 5.3, 5.7).
While model projections of range shifts for fishes agree with theory
and observations, at a regional scale there are known deficiencies in
the ways models represent the impacts of ocean variables such as
temperature and productivity (Sections 5.2.3, 5.7).

1.8.1.4  Palaeoclimate Data

Palaeoclimate data provide a way to establish the nature of ocean
and cryosphere changes prior to direct measurements (Figure 1.3),
induding natural variability and early anthropogenic climate change
(Masson-Delmotte et al., 2013; Abram et al., 2016). Palaeocimate
records utilise the accumulation of physical, chemical or biological
properties within natural archives that are related to dimate at the
time the archive formed. Commonly used palaeoclimate evidence
for ocean and cryosphere change comes from marine and lake
sediments, ice layers and bubbles, tree growth rings, past shorelines
and shallow reef deposits. In many mountain areas, centuries to
millennia of palaeocimate information is now being lost through
widespread melting of glacier ice (Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 2).
Palaeoclimate data are spatially limited (Figure 1.3), but often
represent regional to global-scale climate patterns, either individually
or as syntheses of networks of data (PAGES2K Consortium, 2017).

Palaeoclimate data provide evidence for multi-metre global sea
level rises and shifts in climate zones and ocean ecosystems during
past warm dimate states where temperatures were similar to those
expected later this century (Hansen et al., 2016; Fischer et al., 2018;
Section 4.2.2). Palaeoclimate reconstructions give context to recent
ocean and cryosphere changes that are unusual in the context of
variability over past centuries to millennia, including acceleration in
Greenland and Antarctic Peninsula ice-melt (Section 3.3.1), declining
Arctic sea ice (Section 3.2.1), and emerging evidence for a slowdown
of AMOC (Section 6.7.1). Assessments of climate model performance
across a wider-range of climate states than is possible using direct
observations alone also draws on palaeoclimate data (Flato et al.
2013), and since AR5 important progress has been made to calibrate
modelled ice sheet processes and future sea level rise based on
palaeoclimate evidence (Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3).
Framing and Context of the Report Chapter 1

 

   
 
    
 
  

 
   

 

 

 

Pre-Industrial Recent past Near term End-of-Century
: 1850-1900 1986-2005 2031-2050 2081-2100
- 900
) | 800
©
so Æ - 700
Carbon Dioxide FO
(parts per million) S | 600
SN
500 Projection | °°
400 D
Palaeoclimate data
00 o © CON) | - 300
1800 1850 1900 1950 2000 2050 2100
T

 

    
 

Physical ocean 1.1 M (0-800 m depth}
(temperature and salinity) 380 k (800-2000 m depth)
n hé
S : : 25k
2 | Ocean biogeochemistry
É (dissolved inorganic carbon)
8 : 12k
| Ocean biology
& | (continuous plankton recorder data)
n
£ 776
Sea level (tide gauges)
| 837
Glacier length
<« . empeue nn
Remote sensing: ocean our 5 =
surface ocean acean height D
ocean mass change ===
Remoïe sensing: a TS
cryosphere glacier ae sheët mass change RS
. 649
Palaeoclimate data
« — RCPS (508
odel simulations Historical Extended

RCPSs

   
 
 

Palaeo

 

1800 1850 1900 1950 2000 2050 2100
Year
0% 5% 10% 20% 30% 50% 75% 100%

Spatial data coverage across domain or globe

Figure 1.3 | Illustrative examples of the availability of ocean and cryosphere data relative to the major time periods assessed in the Special Report on the Oceans and
Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC). Upper panel; observed (Keeling et al, 1976) and reconstructed (Bereïter et al, 2015) atmospheric CO2 concentrations, as
well as the Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) of CO for low (RCP2.6) and high (RCP8.5) future emission scenarios (van Vuuren et al, 2011a; Cross-Chapter
Box 1 in Chapter 1). Lower panel illustrative examples of data availability for the ocean and cryosphere (Section 1.8.1; Taylor et al., 2012; Boyer et al, 2013; Dowell et
al, 2013; MQuatters-Gollop et al., 20715; Raup et al, 2015; Olsen et al, 2016; PSMSL, 2016; PAGES2K Consortium, 20717; WGMS, 2017). The amount of data available
through time is shown by the heights of the time series for observational data, palaeoclimate data and model simulations, expressed relative to the maximum annual data
availability (maximum values given on plot; M = million, k = thousand). Spatial coverage of data across the globe or the relevant domain is shown by colour scale. See
SM1.4 for further details.

101

 
 

Chapter 1

1.8.2 Indigenous Knowledge and Local Knowledge
Humans create, use, and adapt knowledge systems to interact with
their environment (Agrawal, 1995; Escobar, 2001; Sillitoe, 2007), and
to observe and respond to change (Huntington, 2000; Gearheard et al.
2013; Maldonado et al., 2016; Yeh, 2016). Indigenous knowledge
(IK) refers to the understandings, skills, and philosophies developed
by societies with long histories of interaction with their natural
surroundings. It is passed on from generation to generation, flexible,
and adaptive in changing conditions, and increasingly challenged
in the context of contemporary climate change. Local knowledge
(LK) is what non-Indigenous communities, both rural and urban,
use on a daily and lifelong basis. It is multi-generational, embedded
in community practices and cultures and adaptive to changing
conditions (FAO, 2018). Each chapter of SROCC cites examples of IK
and LK related to ocean and cryosphere change.

IK and LK stand on their own, and also enrich and complement each
other and scientific knowledge. For example, Australian Aboriginal
groups’ Indigenous oral history provides empirical corroboration of
the sea level rise 7,000 years ago (Nunn and Reid, 2016), and their
seasonal calendars direct hunting, fishing, planting, conservation and
detection of unusual changes today (Green et al., 2010). LK works in
tandem with scientific knowledge, for example, as coastal Australian
communities consider the impacts and trade-offs of sea level rise
(O'Neill and Graham, 2016).

Both IK and LK are increasingly used in climate change research
and policy efforts to engage affected communities to facilitate
site-specific understandings of, and responses to, the local effects of
climate change (Hiwasaki et al, 2014; Hou et al., 2017; Mekonnen
et al., 2017). IK and LK enrich CRDPSs particularly by engaging
multiple stakeholders and the diversity of socioeconomic, cultural
and linguistic contexts of populations affected by changes in the
ocean and cryosphere (Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 1).

Global environmental assessments increasingly recognise the
importance of IK and LK (Thaman et al, 2013; Beck et al, 2014;
Diaz et al, 2015). References to IK in IPCC assessment reports
increased 60% from AR4 to AR5, and highlighted the exposures and
vulnerabilities of Indigenous populations to climate change risks
related to socioeconomic status, resource-based dependence and
geographic location (Ford et al., 2016a). AIl four IPBES assessments
in 2018 (IPBES, 2018a; IPBES, 2018b; IPBES, 2018c; IPBES, 2018d)
engaged IK and LK (Diaz et al., 2015; Roué and Molnar, 2017; Diaz
et al, 2018). Peer-reviewed research on IK and LK is burgeoning
(Savo et al., 2016), providing information that can guide responses
and inform policy (Huntington, 2011; Nakashima et al, 2012;
Lavrillier and Gabyshev, 2018). However, most global assessments
still fail to incorporate ‘the plurality and heterogeneity of worldviews'
(Obermeister, 2017), resulting ‘in a partial understanding of core
issues that limits the potential for locally and culturally appropriate
adaptation responses’ (Ford et al., 2016b).

IK and LK provide case specific information that may not be easily
extrapolated to the scales of disturbance that humans exert on

102

Framing and Context of the Report

natural systems (Wohling, 2009). Some forms of IK and LK are
also not amenable to being captured in peer-reviewed articles or
published reports, and efforts to translate IK and LK into qualitative
or quantitative data may mute the multidimensional, dynamic and
nuanced features that give IK and LK meaning (DeWalt, 1994;
Roncoli et al., 2009; Goldman and Lovell, 2017). Nonetheless, efforts
to collaborate with IK and LK knowledge holders (Baptiste et al.
2017; Karki et al, 2017; Lavrillier and Gabyshev, 2017; Roué et al.
2017; David-Chavez and Gavin, 2018) and to systematically assess
published IK and LK literature in parallel with scientific knowledge
result in increasingly effective usage of the multiple knowledge
systems to better characterise and address ocean and cryosphere
change (Huntington et al., 2017; Nalau et al., 2018; Ford et al., 2019).

1.8.3 The Role of Knowledge in People's Responses

to Climate, Ocean and Cryosphere Change

To hold global average temperature to well below 2°C above
pre-industrial levels, substantial changes in the day-to-day activities of
individuals, families, communities, the private sector, and governance
bodies will be required (Ostrom, 2010; Creutzig et al., 2018). Enabling
these changes at a meaningful societal scale requires sensitivity to
communities and their use of multiple knowledge systems to best
motivate effective responses to the risks and opportunities posed by
climate change (medium confidence) (1.8.2, Cross-Chapter Box 4 in
Chapter 1). Meaningful engagement of people and communities with
climate change information depends on that information cohering
with their perception of how the world works (Crate and Fedorov,
2013). The values and identities people hold affect how acceptable
they find the behavioural changes, technological solutions and
governance that dimate change action requires (Moser, 2016).

Education and dimate literacy contribute to climate change action
and adaptation (high confidence). Although public understanding
of humanity's role in both causing and abating climate change
has increased in the last decade (Milfont et al., 2017), levels of
climate concern vary greatly globally (Lee et al., 2015). Educational
attainment has the strongest effect on raising climate change
awareness (Lee et al., 2015), and research documents the value of
evidence-based climate change education, particularly during formal
schooling (Motta, 2018). People further understand climate change
as a serious threat when they experience it in their lives and have
knowledge of its human causes (Lee et al., 2015; Shi et al., 2016).
Education and tailored climate communication strategies that are
respectful of people's values and identity can aid acceptance and
implementation of the local to global-scale approaches and policies
required for effective climate change mitigation and adaptation (Shi
et al., 2016; Anisimov and Orttung, 2018; Sections 3.5.4, 4.4), while
also supporting CRDP (see also Cross-Chapter Box 2 in Chapter 1,
and FAQ1.2).

Human psychology complicates engagement with dimate change,
due to complex social factors, including values (Corner et al., 2014),
identity (Unsworth and Fielding, 2014), ideology (Smith and Mayer,
2019) and the framing of dimate messaging. Additionally, psychology
Framing and Context of the Report

effects adaptation actions, motivated by perceptions that others
are already adapting, avoidance of an unpleasant state of mind,
feelings of self-efficacy and belief in the efficacy of the adaptation
action (van Valkengoed and Steg, 2019). Better understandings of
the psychological implications across diverse communities and social

Chapter 1

change on natural and human environments (e.g., extreme weather)
or human-caused modifications to the environment (e.g., adaptation)
will raise further psychological challenges. This includes psychological
impacts to the emotional wellbeing of people adversely affected
by climate change (Ogunbode et al., 2018), resulting in solastalgia

(Albrecht et al, 2007), a distress akin to homesickness while in their
home environment (McNamara and Westoby, 2011).

and political contexts will facilitate a just transition of both emissions
reduction and adaptation (Schlosberg et al. 2017). Impacts of dimate

 

Cross-Chapter Box 4 | Indigenous Knowledge and Local Knowledge in Ocean
and Cryosphere Change

Authors: Susan Crate (USA), William Cheung (Canada), Bruce Glavovic (New Zealand), Sherilee Harper (Canada),
Hélène Jacot Des Combes (Fiji/France), Monica Ell Kanayuk (Canada), Ben Orlove (USA), Joanna Petrasek MacDonald (Canada),
Anjal Prakash (Nepal/india), lake Rice (Canada), Pasang Yangjee Sherpa (Nepal), Martin Sommerkorn (Nonway/Germany)

Introduction

This Cross-Chapter Box describes how Indigenous knowledge (IK) and local knowledge (LK) are different and unique sources
of knowledge, which are critical to observing, responding to, and governing the ocean and cryosphere in a changing dimate (See SROCC
Annex |: Glossary for definitions). International organisations recognise the importance of IK and LK in global assessments, including
UN Environment, UNDP, UNESCO, IPBES, and the World Bank. IK and LK are referenced throughout SROCC, understanding that
many climate change impacts affect, and will require responses from, local communities (both Indigenous and non-Indigenous) who
maintain a close connection with the ocean and/or cryosphere.

Attention to IK and LK in understanding global change is relatively recent, but important (high confidence). For instance, in 1980,
Alaskan Inuit formed the Alaska Eskimo Whaling Commission in response to the International Whaling Commission's science that
underestimated the Bowhead whale population and, in 1977, banned whaling as a result (Huntington, 1992). The Commission
facilitated an improved population count using a study design based on IK, which indicated a harvestable population (Huntington,
2000). There are various approaches for utilising multiple knowledge systems. For example, the Mi'kmaw Elders’ concept of Two Eyed
Seeing: which is ‘learning to see from one eye with the strengths of Indigenous knowledges, and from the other eye with the strengths
of Western [scientific] knowledges, and to use both together, for the benefit of all’ (Bartlett et al., 2012), to preserve the distinctiveness
of each, while allowing for fuller understandings and actions (Bartlett et al., 2012: 334).

Knowledge Co-production

Scientific knowledge, IK and LK can complement one another by engaging both quantitative data and qualitative information,
including people's observations, responses and values (Huntington, 2000; Crate and Fedorov, 2013; Burnham et al. 2016; Figure CB4.1).
However, this process of knowledge co-production is complex (Jasanoff, 2004) and IK and LK possess uncertainties of a different
nature from those of scientific knowledge (Kahneman and Egan, 2011), often resulting in the dominance of scientific knowledge over
IK and LK in policy, governance and management (Mistry and Berardi, 2016). Working across disciplines (interdisciplinarity; Strang,
2009), and/or engaging multiple stakeholders (transdisciplinarity; Klenk and Meehan, 2015; Crate et al., 2017), are approaches used
to bridge knowledge systems. The use of all knowledge relevant to à specific challenge can involve approaches such as: scenario
building across stakeholder groups to capture the multiple ways people perceive their environment and act within it (Klenk and
Meehan, 2015); knowledge co-production to achieve collaborative management efforts (Armitage et al, 2011); and working with
communities to identify shared values and perceptions that enable context-specific adaptation strategies (Grunblatt and Alessa,
2017). Broad stakeholder engagement, including affected communities, Indigenous Peoples, local and regional representatives, policy
makers, managers, interest groups and organisations, has the potential to effectively use all relevant knowledge (Obermeister, 2017)
and produce results that reduce the disproportionate influence that formally educated and economically advantaged groups often
exert in scientific assessments (Castree et al., 2014).

103
Chapter 1 Framing and Context of the Report

Cross-Chapter Box 4 (continued)

Co-production
of new knowledge

 
  
 

Trajectory of
knowledge
systems
over time

Independently
available

knowledge
systems

Figure CB4.1 | Knowledge co-production using scientific knowledge, Indigenous knowledge {IK) and/or local knowledge {LK) to create new understandings for
decision making. Panels A, B, and € represent the use of one, two, and three knowledge systems, respectively, illustrating co-production moments in time (collars).
Panel A represents a context which uses one knowledge system, for example, of IK used by Indigenous peoples; or of LK used by farmers, fishers and rural or
urban inhabitants; or of scientific knowledge used in contexts where substantial human presence is lacking. Panel B depicts the use of two knowledge systems, as
described in this Cross-Chapter Box in the case of Bowhead whale population counts and in Himalayan flood management. Panel € illustrates the use of all three
knowledge systems, as in the Pacific case in this Cross-Chapter Box. Each collar represents how making use of knowledge from different systems is a matter of both
identifying available knowledge across systems and of knowledge holder deliberations. In these processes, learning takes place on how to relate knowledge from
different systems for the purpose of improved decisions and solutions. Knowledge from different systems can enrich the body of relevant knowledge while continuing
independently or can be combined to co-produce new knowledge.

Contributions to SROCC
Observations, responses, and governance are three important contributions that IK and LK make in ocean and cryosphere change:

Observations: IK and LK observations document glacier and sea ice dynamics, permafrost dynamics, coastal processes, etc.
(Sections 2.3.2.2.2, 2.5, 3.2.2, 3.4.1.1, 3.4.1.1, 3.4.1.2, 4.3.2.4.2, 5.2.3 and Box 2.4), and how they interact with social-cultural factors
(West and Hovelsrud, 2010). Researchers have begun documenting IK and LK observations only recently (Sections 2.3.1.1, 3.2, 3.4,
3.5, Box 4.4,5.4.2.2.1).

Responses: Either IK or LK alone (Yager, 2015), or used with scientific knowledge (Nüsser and Schmidt, 2017) inform responses
(Sections 2.3.1.3.2, 2.3.2.2.2, 3.5.2, 3.5.4, 4.4.2, Box 4.4, 5.5.2, 6.8.4, 6.9.2). Utilising multiple knowledge systems requires continued
development, accumulation, and transmission of IK, LK and scientific knowledge towards understanding the ecological and cultural
context of diverse peoples (Crate and Fedorov, 2013; Jones et al., 2016), resulting in the incorporation of relevant priorities and
contexts into adaptation responses (Sections 3.5.2, 3.5.4, 4.4.4, 5.5.2, 6.8.4, 6.9.2, Box 2.3).

Governance: Using IK and LK in climate decision and policy making includes customary Indigenous and local institutions (Karlsson and
Hovelsrud, 2015), as in the case when Indigenous communities are engaged in an integrated approach for disaster risk reduction in
response to cryosphere hazards (Carey et al., 2015). The effective engagement of communities and stakeholders in decisions requires
using the multiple knowledge systems available (Chilisa, 2011; Sections 2.3.1.3.2, 2.3.2.3, 3.5.4, 4.4.4, Table 4.4, 5.5.2, 6.8.4, 6.9.2;
Sections 2.3.1.3.2, 2.3.2.3, 3.5.4, 4.4.4, Table 4.9, 5.5.2, 6.8.4, 6.9.2).

104
Framing and Context of the Report Chapter 1

Cross-Chapter Box 4 (continued)

Examples from regions covered in this report

IK and EK in the Pacific: Historically, Pacific communities, who depend on marine resources for essential protein (Pratchett et al., 2011),
use LK for management systems to determine access to, and dosure of, fishing grounds, the latter to respect community deaths, sacred
sites, and customary feasts. Today a hybrid system, Locally Managed Marine Protected Areas (LMMAs), is common and integrates local
governance with NGO or government agency interventions (Jupiter et al., 2014). The expected benefits of these management systems
support climate change adaptation through sustainable resource management (Roberts et al. 2017) and mitigation through improved
carbon storage (Vierros, 2017). The challenges to wider use include both how to upscale LMMAs (Roberts et al., 2017; Vierros, 2017),
and how to assess them as climate change adaptation and mitigation solutions (Rohe et al., 2017; Section 5.4).

 

IK and Pikialasorsuaq: Pikialasorsuaq (North Water Polynya), in Baffin Bay, is the Arctic's largest polynya, or area of open water
surrounded byice, andis also one ofthe most biologically productive regions in the Arctic (Barber et al., 2001).Adjacent Inuit communities
depend on Pikialasorsuaq for their food security and subsistence economy (Hastrup et al, 2018). They use Qaujimajatuqangit, an IK
system, in daily and seasonal activities (ICC, 2017). The sea ice bridge north of the Pikialasorsuaq is no longer forming as reliably as
in the past, resulting in a polynya that is geographically and seasonally less defined (Ryan and Münchow, 2017). In response, the
Inuit Circumpolar Council initiated the Pikialasorsuaq Commission who formed an Inuit-led management authority to (1) oversee
monitoring and research to conserve the polynya's living resources; (2) identify an Indigenous Protected Area, to include the polynya
and dependent communities; and (3) establish a free travel zone for Inuit across the Pikialasorsuaq region (ICC, 2017; Box 3.2).

LK in the Alps: Mountain guides and other local residents engaged in supporting mountain tourism draw on LK for livelihood
management. À study at Mont Blanc lists specific cryosphere changes which they have observed, including glacial shrinkage and
reduction in ice and snow cover. Às a result, the categorisation of the difficulty of a number of routes has changed, and the timing
of the climbing season has shifted earlier (Mourey and Ravanel, 2017; Section 2.3.5).

LK to manage flooding: Climate change is increasing glacial melt water and rain-induced disasters in the Himalayan region and
affected communities in China, Nepal, and India use LK to adapt (Nadeem et al, 2012). For instance, rains upstream in Gandaki
(Nepal) flood downstream areas of Bihar, India. Local communities’ knowledge of forecasting floods has evolved over time through
the complexities of caste, class, gender and ecological flux, and is critical to flood forecasting and disaster risk reduction. Local
communities manage risk by using a diverse set of knowledge, including phenomenological (e.g., river sound), ecological (e.g., red ant
movement) and riverine (e.g. river colour) indicators, alongside meteorological and official information (Acharya and Prakash, 2018;
Section 2.3.2.3).

Knowledge Holders’ Recommendations for Utilising IK and LK in Assessment Reports

Perspectives from the Himalayas: \K and LK holders in the Himalayas have conducted long-term systematic observations in these remote
areas for centuries. Contemporary IK details change in phenology, weather patterns, and flora and fauna species, which enriches scientific
knowledge of glacial retreat and potential glacial lake outbursts (Sherpa, 2014). The scientific community can close many knowledge gaps
by engaging IK and LK holders as counterparts. Suggestions towards this objective are to work with affected communities to elicit their
knowledge of change, especially IK and LK holders with more specialised knowledge (farmers, herders, mountain guides, etc.), and use
location- and culture-spedific approaches to share scientific knowledge and use it with IK and LK.

Perspectives from the Inuit Circumpolar Council (CC), Canada: Engaging Inuit as partners across all climate research disciplines
ensures that Inuit knowledge and priorities guide research, monitoring, and the reporting of results in Inuit homeland. Doing so
enhances the effectiveness, impact, and usefulness of global assessments, and ensures that Inuit knowledge is appropriately reported
in assessments. Inuit seek to achieve self-determination in all aspects of research carried out in Inuit homeland (e.g., Nickels et al.
2005). Inuit actively produce and use climate research (e.g., ITK, 2005; ICC, 2015) and lead approaches to address climate challenges
spurred by great incentive to develop innovative solutions. Engaging Inuit representative organisations and governments as partners
in research recognises that the best available knowledge includes IK, enabling more robust climate research that in turn informs
dimate policy. When interpreted and applied properly, IK comes directly from research by Inuit and from an Inuit perspective (ICC,
2018). This can be achieved by working with Inuit on scoping and methodology for assessments and supporting inclusion of Inuit
experts in research, analysis, and results dissemination.

105
 

Chapter 1

1.9 Approaches Taken in this Special Report

1.9.1 Methodologies Relevant to this Report

SROCC assesses literature on ocean and cryosphere change and
associated impacts and responses, focusing on advances in knowledge
since AR5. The literature used is primarily published, peer-reviewed
scientific, social science and humanities research. In some cases, grey
literature sources (for example, published reports from governments,
industry, research institutes and non-government organisations) are
used where there are important gaps in available peer-reviewed
literature. It is recognised that published knowledge from many parts
of the world most vulnerable to ocean and cryosphere change is still
limited (Czerniewicz et al., 2017).

Where possible, SROCC draws upon established methodologies
and/or frameworks. Cross-Chapter Boxes in Chapter 1 address
methodologies used for projections of future change (Cross-Chapter
Box 1 in Chapter 1), for assessing and reducing risk (Cross-Chapter
Box 2 in Chapter 1), for governance options relevant to a problem
or region (Cross-Chapter Box 3 in Chapter 1), and for using IK
and LK (Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 1). It is recognised in the
assessment process that multiple and non-static factors determine
human vulnerabilities to climate change impacts, and that
ecosystems provide essential services that have both commercial
and non-commercial value (Section 1.5). Economic methods are also
important in SROCC, for estimating the economic value of natural
systems, and for aiding decision-making around mitigation and
adaptation strategies (Section 1.6).

1.9.2 Communication of Confidence

in Assessment Findings

SROCC uses calibrated language for the communication of
confidence in the assessment process (Mastrandrea et al, 2010;
Mach et al., 2017). Calibrated language is designed to consistently
evaluate and communicate uncertainties that arise from incomplete
knowledge due to a lack of information, or from disagreement about
what is known or even knowable. The IPCC calibrated language
uses qualitative expressions of confidence based on the robustness
of evidence for a finding, and (where possible) uses quantitative
expressions to describe the likelihood of a finding (Figure 1.4).

Qualitative expressions (confidence scale) describe the validity
of a finding based on the type, amount, quality and consistency of
evidence, and the degree of agreement between different lines
of evidence (Figure 1.4, step 2). Evidence indudes all knowledge
sources, including IK and LK where available. Very high and high
confidence findings are those that are supported by multiple lines
of robust evidence with high agreement. Low or very low confidence
describe findings for which there is limited evidence and/or low
agreement among different lines of evidence, and are only presented
in SROCC if they address a major topic of concern.

106

Framing and Context of the Report

 

Step 1: Evaluate evidence and agreement

 

 

   
 

Observations Theory Statistics Models Experiments Process
| v v v v v v
L Sufficient evidence and agreement to evaluate confidence?
Step 2: Evaluate confidence
Confidence
High agreement Higl Language
Limited evidence Medium Very high
(Emerging) y 19
+ Medium agreement Medium agreeme: High
Ë Limited evidence Medium evidence O— Medium
D
D Low agreement Low agreement o— Low
Limited evidence Medium evidence Very
(Limited) o— Very low
Evidence (type, amount, quality, consistency) Île
Examples

* Glacier retreat and permafrost thaw have decreased the stability of mountain slopes and the
integrity of infrastructure (high confidence) {2.3}

- There is currently {ow confidence in appraising past open ocean productivity trends,
including those determined by satellites, due to newly identified region-specific drivers of
microbial growth and the lack of corroborating in situ time series datasets. {5.2.2}

L Sufficient confidence and quantitative/probabilistic evidence to evaluate likelihood?

 

Step 3: Evaluate statistical likelihood

 

Likelihood Statistical Level Statistical Range
Language (assessing change) (assessing range)
Virtually certain >99%
Extremely likely >95%
Very likely >90% 5-95% range
Likely >66% 17-83% range
More likely than not >50% 25-75% range
About as likely as not 33-66%
Unlikely <33% <17% and >83% (both tails)
Very unlikely <10% <5% and >95% (both tails)
Extremely unlikely <5%
Exceptionally unlikely <1%

 

Example: statistical level

Reference Change

+ Satellite observations reveal that marine heatwaves have
very likely doubled in frequency between 1982 and 2016,
and that they have also become longer-lasting, more intense
and extensive. {6.4}

 

 

 

Examples: statistical range 0%

 
 
  
    

OA 00%

+ The AMOC will very likely weaken over the 21st likely (66%)
century (high confidence), although a collapse is Level of
very unlikely (medium confidence). very unlikely riskfimpact
Nevertheless, a substantial weakening of the {both tails)

AMOC remains a physically plausible scenario. K 295%
{6.7

+ Global mean sea level will rise between
0.43 m (0.29-0.59 m, likely range} (RCP2.6)
and 0.84 m (0.61-1.10 m, likely range)
{RCP8.5) by 2100 (medium confidence)
relative to 1986-2005. {4.2.3}

likely
(17%-83%)

{

>5%

 

 

 

Deep uncertainty (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1)

+ Evolution of the Antarctic Ice Sheet beyond the end of the 21st century is characterised by
deep uncertainty as ice sheet models lack realistic representations of some of the
underlying physical processes. {Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3}

 

 

 

Figure 1.4] Schematic of the IPCC usage of calibrated language, with examples
of confidence and likelihood statements from this report. Figure developed
after Mastrandrea et al. (2010), Mach et al. (2017) and Sutton (2018).
Framing and Context of the Report

Quantitative expressions (likelihood scale) are used when sufficient
data and confidence exists for findings to be assigned a quantitative
or probabilistic estimate (Figure 1.4, step 3). In the scientific literature,
a finding is often said to be significant if it has a likelihood exceeding
95% confidence. Using calibrated IPCC language, this level of
statistical confidence would be termed extremely likely. Lower levels
of likelihood than those derived numerically can be assigned by
expert judgement to take into account structural or measurement
uncertainties within the products or data used to determine the
probabilistic estimates (e.g., Table CB1.1). Likelihood statements
may be used to describe how climate changes relate to the ends of
distribution functions, such as in detection and attribution studies
that assess the likelihood that an observed climate change or event is
different to a reference dimate state (Section 1.3). In other situations,
likelihood statements refer to the central region across a distribution
of possibilities. Examples are the estimates of future changes based
on large ensembles of climate model simulations, where the central
66% of estimates across the ensemble (ie. the 17-83% range)
would be termed a likely range (Figure 1.4, step 3).

Chapter 1

Ramanathan, 2017; Spratt and Dunlop, 2018; Sutton, 2018). In
response to the need to reframe policy relevant assessments according
to risk (Section 1.5; Mach et al., 2016; Weaver et al., 2017; Sutton,
2018), an effort is made in SROCC to report on potential changes
for which there is low scientific confidence or a low likelihood of
occurrence, but that would have large impacts if realised (Mach
et al. 2017). In some cases where evidence is limited or emerging,
phenomena may instead be discussed according to physically
plausible scenarios of impact (e.g., Table 6.1).

In some cases, deep uncertainty (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1)
may exist in current scientific assessments of the processes, rate,
timing, magnitude, and consequences of future ocean and cryosphere
changes. This includes physically plausible high-impact changes,
such as high-end sea level rise scenarios that would be costly if
realised without effective adaptation planning and even then may
exceed limits to adaptation. Means such as expert judgement,
scenario building, and invoking multiple lines of evidence enable
comprehensive risk assessments even in cases of uncertain future

 

ocean and cryosphere changes.
It is increasingly recognised that effective risk management requires
assessments not just of ‘what is most likely” but also of ‘how bad
things could get’ (Mach et al, 2017; Weaver et al., 2017; Xu and

Cross-Chapter Box 5 | Confidence and Deep Uncertainty

Authors: Carolina Adler (Switzerland/Australia), Michael Oppenheimer (USA), Nerilie Abram (Australia), Kathleen Mcinnes (Australia)
and Ted Schuur (USA)

Definition and Context

Characterising, assessing and managing risks to climate change involves dealing with inherent uncertainties. Uncertainties can lead to
complex decision-making situations for managers and policymakers tasked with risk management, particularly where decisions relate
to possibilities assessed as having low or unknown confidence/likelihood, yet would have high impacts if realised. While uncertainty
can be quantitatively or qualitatively assessed (Section 1.9.2; Figure 1.4), a situation of deep uncertainty exists when experts or
stakeholders do not know or cannot agree on: (1) appropriate conceptual models that describe relationships among key driving forces
in a system; (2) the probability distributions used to represent uncertainty about key variables and parameters; and/or, (3) how to
weigh and value desirable alternative outcomes (adapted from Lempert et al., 2003; Marchau et al., 2019b).

The concept of deep uncertainty has been debated and addressed in the literature for some time, with diverse terminology used.
Terms such as great uncertainty (Hansson and Hirsch Hadorn, 2017), contested uncertain knowledge (Douglas and Wildavsky, 1983),
ambiguity (Ellsberg, 1961) and Knightian uncertainty (Knight, 1921) among others, are also present in the literature to refer to the
multiple components of uncertainty that need to be accounted for in decision making. The purpose of this Cross-Chapter Box is to
constructively engage with the concept of deep uncertainty, by first providing some context for how the IPCC has dealt with deep
uncertainty in the past. This is followed by examples of cases from the ocean and cryosphere assessments in the Special Report on the
Oceans and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (SROCC), where deep uncertainty has been addressed to advance assessment of risks
and their management.

How has the IPCC and other literature dealt with deep uncertainty?

The IPCC assessment process provides instances of how deep uncertainty can manifest. In assessing the scientific evidence for
anthropogenic climate change, and its influence on the Earth system in the past and future, IPCC assessments can identify areas where
a large range of possibilities exist in the scientific literature or where knowledge of the underlying processes and responses is lacking.
Existing guidelines to ensure consistent treatment of uncertainties by IPCC author teams (Mastrandrea et al., 2010; Section 1.9.2) may
not be sufficient to ensure the desired consistency or guide robust findings when conditions of deep uncertainty are present (Adler
and Hirsch Hadorn, 2014).

107
Chapter 1 Framing and Context of the Report

Cross-Chapter Box 5 (continued)

The IPCC, and earlier assessments, encountered deep uncertainty when evaluating numerous aspects of the climate change
problem. Examining these cases sheds light on approaches to quantifying and reducing deep uncertainty. An assessment by the
US National Academy of Sciences (Charney et al., 1979; commonly referred to as the Charney Report) provides a dassic example.
Evaluating climate sensitivity to a doubling of carbon dioxide concentration, and developing a probability distribution for it, was
challenging because only two 3-D climate models and a handful of model variants and realisations were available. The panel invoked
three strategies to eliminate some of these simulations: (1) Using multiple lines of evidence to complement the limited model
results; (2) estimating the consequences of poor or absent model representations of certain physical processes (particularly cumulus
convection, high-altitude cloud formation, and non-cloud entrainment); and, (3) evaluating mismatches between model results and
observations. This triage yielded ‘probable bounds’ of 2°C-3.5°C on climate sensitivity. The panel then invoked expert judgment
(Box 12.2 in Collins et al., 2013) to broaden the range to 3 + 1.5°C, with 3°C referred to as the ‘most probable value”. The panel did
not report its confidence in these judgments.

 

The literature has expanded greatly since, allowing successive IPCC assessments to refine the approach taken in the Charney report. By
the IPCC 5th Assessment Report (AR5), four lines of evidence (from instrumental records, palaeodimate data, model intercomparison
of sensitivity, and model-climatology comparisons) were assessed to determine that ‘Equilibrium climate sensitivity is fkely in the
range 1.5°C—4.5°C (high confidence), extremely unlikely less than 1°C (high confidence), and very unlikely greater than 6°C (medium
confidence) (Box 12.2 in Collins et al, 2013). The Charney report began the process of convergence of opinion around a single
probability range (essentially, category (2) in the definition of deep uncertainty, above), at least for sensitivity arising from fast
feedbacks captured by global climate models (Hansen et al., 2007). Subsequent assessments increased confidence, eliminating deep
uncertainty about this part of the sensitivity problem over a wide range of probability.

Cases of Deep Uncertainty from SROCC

Case A: Permafrost carbon and greenhouse gas emissions. AR5 reported the estimated size of the organic carbon pool stored frozen in
permafrost zone soils, but uncertainty estimates were not available (Tarnocai et al., 2009; Ciais et al., 2013). ARS further reported that
future greenhouse gas emissions (CO2 only) from permafrost were the most uncertain biogeochemical feedback on climate of the ten
factors quantified (Figure 6.20 in Ciais et al., 2013). However, the /ow confidence assigned to permafrost was not due to few studies,
but rather to divergence on the conceptual framework relating changes in permafrost carbon and future greenhouse gas emissions, as
well as the probability distribution of key variables. Most large-scale carbon climate models still lack key landscape-level mechanisms
that are known to abruptly thaw permafrost and expose organic carbon to decomposition, and many do not include mechanisms
needed to differentiate the release of methane versus carbon dioxide with their very different global warming potentials. Studies since
AR5 on potential methane release from laboratory soil incubations (Schädel et al., 2016; Knoblauch et al., 2018), actual methane
release from the Siberian shallow Arctic ocean shelves (Shakhova et al., 2013; Thornton et al., 2016), changes in permafrost carbon
stocks from the Last Glacial Maximum until present (Ciais et al., 2011; Lindgren et al., 2018) and potential carbon uptake by future
plant growth (Qian et al, 2010; McGuire et al., 2018) have widened rather than narrowed the uncertainty range (Section 3.4.3.1.1).
Accounting for greenhouse gas release from polar and high mountain (Box 2.2) permafrost, introduces an element of deep uncertainty
when determining emissions pathways consistent with Article 2 of the Paris Agreement (Comyn-Platt et al., 2018). With stakeholder
needs in mind, scientists have been actively engaged in narrowing this uncertainty by using multiple lines of evidence, expert judgment,
and joint evaluation of observations and models. As a result, SROCC has reduced uncertainty and introduced confidence assessments
across some but not all components of this problem (Section 3.4.3.1.1.).

Case B: Antarctic ice sheet and sea level rise Dynamical ice loss from Antarctica (Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3) provides an example
of lack of knowledge about processes, and disagreement about appropriate models and probability distributions for representing
uncertainty (categories (1) and (2) in the definition of deep uncertainty). AR5 used a statistical model and expert judgment to reduce
uncertainty compared to AR4 (Church et al., 2013). Based on modelling of marine ice sheet processes after AR5, SROCC has further
reduced uncertainty in the Antarctic contribution to sea level rise. The likely range including the potential contribution of marine ice
sheet instability is quantified as 0.02-0.23 m for 2081-2100 (and 0.03-0.28 m for 2100) compared to 1986-2005 under RCP8.5
(medium confidence). However, the magnitude of additional rise beyond 2100, and the probability of greater sea level rise than that
included in the fkely range before 2100, are characterised by deep uncertainty (Section 4.2.3).

108
Framing and Context of the Report Chapter 1

Cross-Chapter Box 5 (continued)

Policy makers at various levels of governance are considering adaptation investments (e.g., hardinfrastructure retreat, and nature-based
defences) for multi-decadal time horizons that consider projection uncertainty (Sections 4.4.2, 4.4.3). For example, extreme sea levels
(e.g., the local ‘hundred-year flood”) now occurring during storms that are historically rare are projected to become annual events by
2100 or sooner at many low-lying coastal locations (Section 4.4.3). Sea level rise exceeding the /kely range, or an alternate pathway
to the assumed climate change scenario (e.g., which RCP is used in risk estimation), could alter these projections and both factors
are characterised by deep uncertainty. Among the strategies used to reduce deep uncertainty in these cases are formal and informal
elicitation of expert judgment to project ice sheet behaviour (Horton et al., 2014; Bamber et al., 2019), and development of plausible
sea level rise scenarios, including extreme cases (Sections 4.2.3, 4.4.5.3). Frameworks for risk management under deep uncertainty in
the context of time lags between commitment to ice sheet losses and emissions mitigation, and between coastal adaptation planning
and implementation, are currently emerging in the literature (Section 4.4.5.3.4).

 

Case C: Compound risks and cascading impacts. Compound risks and cascading impacts (Section 6.1, 6.8, Figure 1.1, Figure 6.1)
arise from multiple coincident or sequential hazards (Zscheischler et al., 2018). Compound risks are an example of deep uncertainty
because their rarity means that there is often a lack of data or modelling to characterise the risks statistically under present conditions
or future changes (Gallina et al., 2016), and there is the potential that climate elements could cross tipping points (e.g., Cai et al,
2016). Nevertheless, effective risk reduction strategies can be developed without knowing the statistical likelihoods of such events
by acknowledging the possibility that an event can occur (Dessai et al., 2009). Such strategies are typically well hedged against a
variety of different futures and adjustable through time in response to emerging information (Lempert et al., 2010). Case studies are
useful for raising awareness of the possibility of compound events and provide valuable learnings for decision makers in the form of
analogues (McLeman and Hunter, 2010). They can provide a basis for devising scenarios to stress test systems in other regions for
the purposes of understanding and reducing risk. The case study describing the ocean, climate and weather events in the Australian
state of Tasmania in 2015/2016 (Box 6.1) provides such an example. It led to compound risks that could not have been estimated
due to deep uncertainty. The total cost of the co-occurring fires, floods and marine heat wave to the state government was estimated
at about 300 million USD, and impacts on the food, energy and manufacturing sectors reduced Tasmania's anticipated economic
growth by approximately half (Eslake, 2016). In the aftermath of this event, the government increased funding to relevant agencies
responsible for flood and bushfire management and independent reviews have recommended major policy reforms that are now
under consideration (Blake et al., 2017; Tasmanian Climate Change Office, 2017).

What can we learn from SROCC cases in addressing deep uncertainty?

Using the adapted definition as a framing concept for deep uncertainty (see also Annex 1: Glossary), we find that each of the three
cases described in this Cross-Chapter Box involve at least one of the three ways that deep uncertainty can manifest. In Case A,
incomplete knowledge on relationships and key drivers and feedbacks (category 1), coupled with broadened probability distributions
in post-AR5 literature (category 2), are key reasons for deep uncertainty. In Case B, the inability to characterise the probability of
marine ice sheet instability due to a lack of adequate models resulting in divergent views on the probability of ice loss lead to
deep uncertainty (categories 1 and 2). In Case C, the Australian example provides insights on the inadequacy of models or previous
experience for estimating risk of multiple simultaneous extreme events, contributing to the exhaustion of resources which were then
insufficient to meet the need for emergency response. This case also points to the complex task of addressing multiple simultaneous
extreme events, and the multiple ways of valuing preferred outcomes in reducing future losses (category 3).

The three cases validate the continued iterative process required to meaningfully engage with deep uncertainty in situations of risk,
through means such as elicitation, deliberation and application of expert judgement, scenario building and invoking multiple lines
of evidence. These approaches demonstrate feasible ways to address or even reduce deep uncertainty in complex decision situations
(see also Marchau et al., 2019a), considering that possible obstacles and time investment needed to address deep uncertainty, should
not be underestimated.

109
 

Chapter 1

1.10 Integrated Storyline

of this Special Report

The chapters that follow in this special report are framed around
geographies or climatic processes where the ocean and/or
cryosphere are particularly important for ecosystems and people. The
chapter order follows the movement of water from Earth's shrinking
mountain and polar cryosphere into our rising and warming ocean.

Chapter 2 assesses High Mountain areas outside of the polar
regions, where glaciers, snow and/or permafrost are common.
Chapter 3 moves to the Polar Regions of the northern and southern
high latitudes, which are characterised by vast stores of frozen water
in ice sheets, glaciers, ice shelves, sea ice and permafrost, and by
the interaction of these cryosphere elements and the polar oceans.
Chapter 4 examines Sea Level Rise and the hazards this brings to
Low-Llying Regions, Coasts and Communities. Chapter 5 focuses
on the Changing Ocean, with a particular focus on how climate
change impacts on the ocean are altering Marine Ecosystems
and affecting Dependent Communities. Chapter 6 is dedicated to
assessing Extremes and Abrupt Events, and reflects the potential
for rapid and possibly irreversible changes in Earth's ocean and
cryosphere, and the challenges this brings to Managing Risk. The
multitude ways in which Low-Lying Islands and Coasts are exposed
and vulnerable to the impacts of ocean and cryosphere change,
along with resilience and adaptation strategies, opportunities and
governance options specific to these settings, is highlighted in
integrative Cross-Chapter Box 9.

Framing and Context of the Report

This report does not attempt to assess all aspects of the ocean and
cryosphere in a changing climate. Examples of research themes that
will be covered elsewhere in the IPCC Sixth Assessment Cycle and
not SROCC include: assessments of ocean and cryosphere changes in
the CMIP6 experiments (AR6), cryosphere changes outside of polar
and high mountain regions (e.g., snow cover in temperate and low
altitude settings; AR6), and a thorough assessment of mitigation
options for reducing climate change impacts (SR15, AR6 WGlll).

Each chapter of SROCC presents an integrated storyline on the ocean
and/or cryosphere in a changing dimate. The chapter assessments
each present evidence of the pervasive changes that are already
underway in the ocean and cryosphere (Figure 1.5). The impacts that
physical changes in the ocean and cryosphere have had on ecosystems
and people are assessed, along with lessons learned from adaptation
measures that have already been employed to avoid adverse impacts.
The assessments of future change in the ocean and cryosphere
demonstrate the growing and accelerating changes projected for the
future and identify the reduced impacts and risks that choices for
a low greenhouse gas emission future would have compared with a
high emission future (Figure 1.5). Potential adaptation strategies to
reduce future risks to ecosystems and people are assessed, including
identifying where limits to adaptation may be exceeded. The local- to
global-scale responses for charting CRDP are also assessed.

Figure 1.5 | (right) Observed and modelled historical changes in the ocean and cryosphere since 1950, and projected future changes under low (RCP2.6) and high (RCP8.5)
greenhouse gas emissions scenarios (Cross-Chapter Box 1 in Chapter 1).-Changes are shown for: (a) Global mean surface air temperature change with fkely range (Cross-Chapter
Box 1 in Chapter 1). Ocean-related changes with very likely ranges for (b) Global mean sea surface temperature change (Box 5.1, Section 5.2.2); (c) Change factor in surface
ocean marine heatwave days (6.4.1); (d) Global ocean heat content change (02000 m depth). An approximate steric sea level equivalent is shown with the right axis by
mukiplying the ocean heat content by the global-mean thermal expansion coefficient (£ 0.125 m per 1024 Joules) for observed warming since 1970 (Figure 5.1}; (h) Global
mean surface pH (on the total scale). Assessed observational trends are compiled from open ocean time series sites longer than 15 years (Box 5.1, Figure 5.6, Section 5.2.2); and
{i) Global mean ocean oxygen change (100-600 m depth). Assessed observational trends span 1970-2010 centered on 1996 (Figure 5.8, Section 5.2.2). Sea-level changes
with likely ranges for (m) Global mean sea level change. Hashed shading reflects low confidence in sea level projections beyond 2100 and bars at 2300 reflect expert elicitation
on the range of possible sea level change (Section 4.2.3, Figure 4.2); and components from (e,f) Greenland and Antarctic ice sheet mass loss (Section 3.3.1); and (g) Glacier
mass loss (Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 2, Table 4.1). Further cryosphere-related changes with very likely ranges for (j) Arctic sea ice extent change for September
{Sections 3.2.1, 3.2.2 Figure 3.3); (k) Arctic snow cover change for June {land areas north of 60°N) (Sections 3.4.1, 3.4.2, Figure 3.10); and (1) Change in near-surface (within
3-4 m) permafrost area in the Northern Hemisphere (Sections 3.4.1, 3.4.2, Figure 3.10).

110
Framing and Context of the Report Chapter 1

Past and future changes in the ocean and cryosphere

Historical changes (observed and modelled) and projections under RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 for key indicators
B Historical (observed)  Æ2 Historical (modelled} Æ=— Projected (RCP2.6) = Projected (RCP8.5)

 

    

 

     
  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

  

  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

         
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    
 
  

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

87 (a) Global mean surface air temperature J L 84
4 change relative to 1986-2005
3- + {(h) Surface ocean pH F 8.0
9 J TZ
2 - low acidity b7g ©
1: high acidity
- r 7.8
0
55555 5" —] Se D D D
S|(b) Global mean sea surface temperature [2
4 change relative to 1986-2005 0
o
£ 2 =
{i) Ocean oxygen (100-600 m depth) 4
change relative to 1986-2005
D es ee ee
207 (c) Marine heatwave days 50
5 factor of change relative to 1986-2005
Ë 15. o
£
5 10- &
S {) Arctic sea ice extent -50
5 (September)
4 change relative to 1986-2005
0 7 —100
100
(d) Ocean heat content (0-2000 m depth)
2400 and sea level equivalent (right axis) 50
g change relative to 1986-2005
3 1600 -
3 0 =
© 800- 50
{k) Arctic snow cover extent (June)
0 change relative to 1986-2005
T T T T T T T r T T T T T T —100
1950
year 50
03 - _\ 0
{e) Greenland ice sheet mass loss =
0.2] as sea level equivalent,
g change relative to 1986-2005 50
È ot {l) _ Near-surface permañrost area
El change relative to 1986-2005
T T T T T T T T T T T T —100
0 2000 2050 2100
03 ï ' : year
(ÿ  Antarctic ice sheet mass loss
0.2] as sea level equivalent, 5
g change relative to 1986-2005
È primary drivers
£ 01
4
0.3 -
(g) Glacier mass loss {m) Global mean sea level
02! as sea level equivalent, 0.84m change relative to 198: 3 e
8 change relative to 1986-2005 TT 043m 5
FRE —— Ë
r2
0 Last L
1950 2000 2050 2100 y
_ EE
0
F T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T
1950 2000 2050 2100 2150 2200 2250 2300

year

111
Chapter 1 Framing and Context of the Report

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 1.1] How do changes in the ocean and cryosphere affect our life on planet Earth?

The ocean and cryosphere regulate the climate and weather on Earth, provide food and water, support economies, trade and
transportation, shape cultures and influence our well-being. Many of the recent changes in Earth's ocean and cryosphere are
the result of human activities and have consequences on everyone‘'s life. Deep cuts in greenhouse gas emissions will reduce
negative impacts on billions of people and help them adapt to changes in their environment. Improving education and
combining scientific knowledge with Indigenous knowledge and local knowledge helps communities to further address the
challenges ahead.

 

The ocean and cryosphere -— a collective name for the frozen parts of the Earth - are essential to the climate and
life giving processes on our planet.

Changes in the ocean and cryosphere occur naturally, but the speed, magnitude, and pervasiveness of the
global changes happening right now have not been observed for millennia or longer. Evidence shows that
the majority of ocean and cryosphere changes observed in the past few decades are the result of human
influences on Earth's climate.

Every one of us benefits from the role of the ocean and cryosphere in regulating climate and weather. The ocean
has absorbed about a third of the carbon dioxide humans have emitted from the burning of fossil fuels since the
Industrial Revolution, and the majority (more than 90%) of the extra heat within the Earth system. In this way,
the ocean has slowed the warming humans and ecosystems have experienced on land. The reflective surface of
snow and ice reduce the amount of the sun's energy that is absorbed on Earth. This effect diminishes as snow and
ice melts, contributing to amplified temperature rise across the Arctic. The ocean and cryosphere also sustain life
giving water resources, by rain and snow that come from the ocean, and by melt water from snow and glaciers
in mountain and polar regions.

Nearly two billion people live near the coast, and around 800 million on land less than 10 m above sea level.
The ocean directly supports the food, economies, cultures and well-being of coastal populations (see FAQ 1.2).
The livelihoods of many more are tied closely to the ocean through food, trade, and transportation. Fish and
shellfish contribute about 17% of the non-grain protein in human diets and shipping transports at least 80% of
international imports and exports. But the ocean also brings hazards to coastal populations and infrastructure,
and particularly to low-lying coasts. These populations are increasingly exposed to tropical cyclones, marine heat
waves, sea level rise, coastal flooding and saltwater incursion into groundwater resources.

In high mountains and the Arctic, around 700 million people live in close contact with the cryosphere. These
people, including many Indigenous Peoples, depend on snow, glaciers and sea ice for their livelihoods, food
and water security, travel and transport, and cultures (see FAQ 1.2). They are also exposed to hazards as the
cryosphere changes, including flood outbursts, landslides and coastal erosion. Changes in the polar and high
mountain regions also have far-reaching consequences for people in other parts of the world (see FAQ 3.1).

Warming of the climate system leads to sea level rise. Melt from glaciers and ice sheets is adding to the amount
of water in the ocean, and the heat being absorbed by the ocean is causing it to expand and take up more
space. Today's sea level is already about 20 cm higher than in 1900. Sea level will continue to rise for centuries
to millennia because the ocean system reacts slowly. Even if global warming were to be halted, it would take
centuries or more to halt ice sheet melt and ocean warming.

Enhanced warming in the Arctic and in high mountains is causing rapid surface melt of glaciers and the
Greenland ice sheet. Thawing of permafrost is destabilising soils, human infrastructure, and Arctic coasts, and
has the potential to release vast quantities of methane and carbon dioxide into the atmosphere that will further
exacerbate climate change. Widespread loss of sea ice in the Arctic is opening up new routes for shipping, but
at the same time is reducing habitats for key species and affecting the livelihoods of Indigenous cultures. In
Antarctica, glacier and ice sheet loss is occurring particularly quickly in places where ice is in direct contact with
warm ocean water, further contributing to sea level rise.

Ocean ecosystems are threatened globally by three major climate change-induced stressors: warming, loss
of oxygen and acidification. Marine heat waves are occurring everywhere across the surface ocean, and are
becoming more frequent and more intense as the ocean warms. These are causing disease and mass-mortality

112
Framing and Context of the Report Chapter 1

that put, for example, coral reefs and fish populations at risk. Marine heat waves last much longer than the heat
waves experienced on land, and are particularly harmful for organisms that cannot move away from areas of
warm water.

Warming of the ocean reduces not only the amount of oxygen it can hold, but also tend to stratify it. As a result,
less oxygen is transported to depth, where it is needed to support ocean life. Dissolved carbon dioxide that has
been taken up by the ocean reacts with water molecules to increase the acidity of seawater. This makes the
water more corrosive for marine organisms that build their shells and structures out of mineral carbonates, such
as corals, shellfish and plankton. These climate-change stressors occur alongside other human-driven impacts,
such as overfishing, excessive nutrient loads (eutrophication), and plastic pollution. If human impacts on the
ocean continue unabated, declines in ocean health and services are projected to cost the global economy
428 billion USD yr-! by 2050, and 1.979 trillion USD yr-! by 2100.

 

The speed and intensity of the future risks and impacts from ocean and cryosphere change depend critically on
future greenhouse gas emissions. The more these emissions can be curbed, the more the changes in the ocean
and cryosphere can be slowed and limited, reducing future risks and impacts. But humankind is also exposed to
the effects of changes triggered by past emissions, including sea level rise that will continue for centuries to come.
Improving education and using scientific knowledge alongside local knowledge and Indigenous knowledge can
support the development of context-specific options that help communities to adapt to inevitable changes and
respond to challenges ahead.

113
Chapter 1 Framing and Context of the Report

FAQ 12 | How will changes in the ocean and cryosphere affect meeting the Sustainable
Development Goals?

Ocean and cryosphere change affect our ability to meet the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Progress
on the SDGs support climate action that will reduce future ocean and cryosphere change, and as well as the adaptation
responses to unavoidable changes. There are also trade-offs between SDGs and measures that help communities to adjust
to their changing environment, but limiting greenhouse gas emissions opens more options for effective adaptation and
sustainable development.

 

The SDGs were adopted by the United Nations in 2015 to support action for people, planet and prosperity (FAQ
1.2, Figure 1). The 17 goals and their 169 targets strive to end poverty and hunger, protect the planet and reduce
gender, social and economic inequities by 2030.

SDG 13 (Climate Action) explicitly recognises that changing climatic conditions are a global concern. Climate
change is already causing pervasive changes in Earth's ocean and cryosphere (FAQ 1.1). These changes are
impacting food, water and health securities, with consequences for achieving SDG 2 (Zero Hunger), SDG 3 (Good
Health and Well-Being), SDG 6 (Clean Water and Sanitation), and SDG 1 (No Poverty). Climate change impacts on
Earth's ocean and cryosphere also affect the environmental goals for SDG 14 (Life below Water) and SDG 15 (Life
on Land), with additional implications for many of the other SDGs.

SDG 6 (Clean Water and Sanitation) will be affected by ocean and cryosphere changes. Melting mountain glaciers
bring an initial increase in water, but as glaciers continue to shrink so too will the essential water they provide
to millions of mountain dwellers, downstream communities, and cities. These populations also depend on water
flow from the high mountains for drinking, sanitation, and irrigation, and for SDG 7 (Affordable and Clean Energy).
Water security is also threatened by changes in the magnitude and seasonality of rainfall, driven by rising ocean
temperatures, which increases the risk of severe storms and flooding in some regions, or the risk of more severe
or more frequent droughts in other regions. Among other effects, ongoing sea level rise is allowing salt water to
intrude further inland, contaminating drinking water and irrigation sources for some coastal populations. Actions
to address these threats will likely require new infrastructure to manage rain, melt water, and river flow, in order
to make water supplies more reliable. These actions would also benefit SDG 3 (Good Health and Well-Being) by
reducing the risk of flooding and negative health outcomes posed by extreme rainfall and outbursts of glacial melt.

Climate change impacts on the ocean and cryosphere also have many implications for progress on food security
that is addressed in SDG 2 (Zero Hunger). Changes in rainfall patterns caused by ocean warming will increase
aridity in some areas and bring more (or more intense) rainfall to others. In mountain regions, these changes
bring varying challenges for maintaining reliable crops and livestock production. Some adaptation opportunities
might be found in developing strains of crops and livestock better adapted to the future climate conditions, but
this response option is also challenged by the rapid rate of climate change. In the Arctic, very rapidly warming
temperatures, diminishing sea ice, reduced snow cover and degradation of permafrost are restricting the habitats
and migration patterns of important food sources (SDG 2 Zero Hunger), including reindeer and several marine
mammals (SDG 15 Life on Land; SDG 14 Life below Water), resulting in reduced hunting opportunities for staple
foods that many northern Indigenous communities depend upon.

Rising temperatures, and changes in ocean nutrients, acidity and salinity are altering SDG 14 (Life Below Water).
The productivity and distributions of some fish species are changing in ways that alter availability of fish to
long-established fisheries, whereas the range of fish populations may move to become available in some new
coastal and open ocean areas.

Ocean changes are of concern forsmallislanddevelopingstates and coastal cities and communities. Beyond possible
reductions in marine food supply and related risks for SDG 2 (Zero Hunger), their lives, livelihoods and well-being
are also threatened in ways that are linked to several SDGs, including SDG 3 (Good Health and Wellbeing), SDG
8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth), SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure), and SDG 11 (Sustainable
Cities and Communities). For example, sea level rise and warming oceans can cause inundation of coastal homes
and infrastructure, more powerful tropical storms, declines in established economies such as tourism and losses
of cultural heritage and identity. Improved community and coastal infrastructure can help to adapt to these
changes, and more effective and faster disaster responses from health sectors and other emergency services can
assist the populations who experience these impacts. In some situations, the most appropriate responses may
involve relocation of critical services and, in some cases, communities; and for some populations, migration away
from their homeland may become the only viable response.

114
Framing and Context of the Report Chapter 1

 

   
  

gg ges À on à m0
16 PEACE JUSTICE e + +7 UMR
sn C2 hi (ic
+ _—
dis fe
LIFE —
14 Sustainable EN _
© Development Goals Rg|
1 cu] GENDER
4e 2 EQUALITY
RESPONSIBLE
Vos 17 169 by gun,
CO Goals Targets 2030
1 SUSTAINABLE CMES AFFORDABLE AND
AND COMMUNITIES CLEAN ENERGY
sl,
AËés 108% ae QE

SE
{=> di

FAQ 1.2, Figure 1 | The United Nations 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

Without transformative adaptation and mitigation, climate change could undermine progress towards achieving
the 2030 SDGs, and make it more difficult to implement CRDPSs in the longer term. Reducing global warming
(mitigation) provides the best possibility to limit the speed and extent of ocean and cryosphere change and give
more options for effective adaptation and sustainable development. Progress on SDG 4 (Quality Education),
SDG 5 (Gender Equality) and SDG 10 (Reduced Inequalities) can moderate the vulnerabilities that shape people's
risk to ocean and cryosphere change, while SDG 12 (Responsible Consumption and Production), SDG 16 (Peace,
Justice and Institutions) and SDG 17 (Partnerships for the Goals) will help to facilitate the scales of adaptation
and mitigation responses required to achieve sustainable development. Investment in social and physical
infrastructure that supports adaptation to inevitable ocean and cryosphere changes will enable people to
participate in initiatives to achieve the SDGs. Current and past IPCC efforts have focused on identifying CRDP.
Such adaptation and mitigation strategies, supported by adequate investments, and understanding the potential
for SDG initiatives to increase the exposure or vulnerability of the activities to climate change hazards, could also
constitute pathways for progress on the SDGs.

115
 

Chapter 1

Acknowledgements

Thanks are due to Mohd Abdul Fahad, Mohamed Khamla, Jelto von
Schuckmann and Debabrat Sukla for their assistance with early
versions of figures and graphics.

References

Abraham, JP. et al., 2013: A review of global ocean temperature observations:
Implications for ocean heat content estimates and climate change. Rev.
Geophysics, 51(3), 450-483, doi:10.1002/rog.20022.

Abram, N.J. et al, 2016: Early onset of industrial-era warming across the
oceans and continents. Nature, 536(7617), 411-418, doi:10.1038/
nature19082.

Abram, N.J. et al., 2013: Acceleration of snow melt in an Antarctic Peninsula
ice core during the twentieth century. Nat Geosci, 6(5), 404-411,
doi:10.1038/ngeo1787.

Acharya, À. and A. Prakash, 2018: When the river talks to its people:
local knowledge-based flood forecasting in Gandak River basin,
India. Environmental Development, 31, 55-67, doi:10.1016/.
envdev.2018.12.003.

Ackerman, F, 2013: Valuing the ocean environment. In: Managing ocean
environments in à changing dimate: sustainability and economic
perspectives [Noone, K.J, U.R. Sumaila and R.J. Diaz (eds.}]. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp. 243-275. ISBN 9780124076686.

Adger, W.N. et al., 2013: Cultural dimensions of climate change impacts and
adaptation. Nat Clim. Change, 3(2), 112-117, doi:10.1038/Ndimate1666.

Adger W.N. et al, 2009: Are there social limits to adaptation to climate change?
Clim. Change, 93(3-4), 335-354, doi:10.1007/s10584-008-9520-z.

Adger, W.N. et al., 2014: Human security. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B. VR. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Biller, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
Y.0. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, ES. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 793-832.

Adler, C.E. and G. Hirsch Hadorn, 2014 The IPCC and treatment of
uncertainties: Topics and sources of dissensus. WIRES. Clim. Change, 5(5),
663-676, doi:10.1002/wcc.297.

Agrawal, À., 1995: Dismantling the divide between indigenous and scientific
knowledge. Dev. Change, 26(3), 413-439, doi:10.1111/.1467-7660.1995.
tb00560.x.

Albrecht, G. et al, 2007: Solastalgia: the distress caused by environmental
change. Australas. Psych., 15, S95-S98, doi:10.1080/10398560701701288.

Allen, MR. et al., 2018: Framing and Context. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C.
An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat
of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate
poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Portner, D. Roberts, J. Skea,
PR. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, €. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors,
JLB.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, MI. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock,
M. Tignor and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. World Meteorological Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland, 49-91.

AMAP, 2011: Snow, Water Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic (SWIPA):
Climate Change and the Cryosphere. Arctic Monitoring and Assessment
Programme (AMAP), Oslo, Norway, 538 pp.

AMAP, 2015: AMAP Assessment 2015: Human Health in the Arctic. Arctic
Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP), Oslo, Norway, 165 pp.

116

Framing and Context of the Report

AMAP 2017: Snow, Water, Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic (SWIPA) 2017. Arctic
Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP), Oslo, Norway, 269 pp.
Amsler, L.B., 2016: Collaborative governance: Integrating management,
politics, and law. Public Adm. Rev, 76(5), 700-711, doi:10.1111/

puar.12605.

Amundsen, H. et al, 2018: Local governments as drivers for societal
transformation: Towards the 1.5°C ambition. Curr Opin. Environ. Sustain.,
31, 23-29, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2017.12.004.

Andrade, E. et al, 2018: Project Report: Ascertainment of the estimated
excess mortality from Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico. Milken Institute
School of Public Health ofThe George Washington University, Washington
D.C. 69 pp.

Andreone, G., 2017: The Future of the Law of the Sea: Bridging Gaps Between
National Individual and Common Interests. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, Switzerland. ISBN 9783319512747.

Anisimov, O.A. and R. Orttung, 2018: Climate change in Northern Russia
through the prism of public perception. Ambio, 48(6), 661-671,
doi:10.1007/513280-018-1096-x.

Armitage, D. et al, 2011: Co-management and the co-production of
knowledge: Learning to adapt in Canada's Arctic. Global Environ. Change,
21(3), 995-1004, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.04.006.

Arrigo, K.R. et al, 2017: Melting glaciers stimulate large summer
phytoplankton blooms in southwest Greenland waters. Geophys. Res.
Letters, 44(12), 6278-6285, doi:10.1002/2017GL073583.

Ayers, J. and T. Forsyth, 2009: Community-Based adaptation to climate
change. Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development,
51(4), 22-31, doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.602.

Baker, B. and B. Yeager, 2015: Coordinated ocean stewardship in the Arctic:
Needs, challenges and possible models for an Arctic Ocean coordinating
agreement. Fransnational Environmental Law, 4(2), 359-394, doi:10.1017/
S2047102515000151.

Baldwin, E., P. McCord, J. Dell'Angelo and T. Evans, 2018: Collective action
in a polycentric water governance system. Environmental Policy and
Governance, 28(4), 212-222, doi:10.1002/eet.1810.

Balmaseda, M.A. et al. 2015: The Ocean Reanalyses Intercomparison Project
(ORA:-IP). { Oper Oceanogr, 8(supl), s80-s97, doi:10.1080/175587
6X.2015.1022329,

Balmaseda, M.A., K.E. Trenberth and E. Källén, 2013: Distinctive climate
signals in reanalysis of global ocean heat content. Geophys. Res. Letters,
40(9), 1754-1759, doi:10.1002/grl.50382.

Bamber, JM. et al., 2019: Ice sheet contributions to future sea level rise from
structured expert judgement. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci U.S.A. 116(23), 11195-
11200, doi:10.1073/pnas.1817205116.

Baptiste, B., D. Pacheco, M. Carneiro da Cunha and S. Diaz, 2017: Knowing our
lands and resources: Indigenous and local knowledge of biodiversity and
ecosystem services in the Americas. Knowledges of Nature 11, UNESCO,
Paris, 176 pp.

Barange, M. et al., 2014: Impacts of climate change on marine ecosystem
production in societies dependent on fisheries. Mat. Clim. Change, 43),
211-216, doi:10.1038/nclimate2119.
Framing and Context of the Report

Barber, D. et al, 2001: Physical processes within the North Water (NOW)
polynya. Atmos. Ocean, 39(3), 163-166, doi:10.1080/07055900.2001.96
49673.

Barnett, J. et al. 2014: À local coastal adaptation pathway. Nat. Clim. Change,
4(12), 1103-1108, doi:10.1038/nclimate2383.

Bartlett, C.. M. Marshall and A. Marshall, 2012: Two-eyed seeing and
other lessons learned within a co-learning journey of bringing together
indigenous and mainstream knowledges and ways of knowing. { Environ.
Stud. Sci, 2(4), 331-340, doi:10.1007/513412-012-0086-8.

Beck, S. et al., 2014: Towards a reflexive turn in the governance of global
environmental expertise the cases of the IPCC and the IPBES. GA/A., 23(2),
80-87, doi:10.14512/gaia.23.2.4.

Bell, J.D., LE. Johnson and A.J. Hobday, 2011: Vuinerability of tropical Pacific
fisheries and aquaculture to dimate change. Secretariat of the Pacific
Community, Noumea, New Caledonia, 925 pp.

Bereiter, B. et al, 2015: Revision of the EPICA Dome € CO2 record from
800 to 600 kyr before present. Geophys. Res. Letters, 42(2), 542-549,
doi:10.1002/2014GL061957.

Berner, R.A. and Z. Kothavala, 2001: GEOCARB III: A revised model of
atmospheric CO2 over Phanerozoic time. Am. { Sci, 301(2), 182-204,
doi:10.2475/ajs.301.2.182.

Berrang-Ford, L. et al., 2014: What drives national adaptation? À global
assessment. Clim. Change, 124(1-2), 441-450, doi:10.1007/510584-014-
1078-3.

Biemans, H. et al, 2019: Importance of snow and glacier meltwater for
agriculture on the Indo-Gangetic Plain. Nature Sustainability, 2, 594-601,
doi: 10.1038/s41893-019-0305-3.

Biggs, R. et al, 2012: Toward principles for enhancing the resilience
of ecosystem services. Annu. Rev Environ. Resour, 37(1), 421-448,
doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-051211-123836.

Billé, R. et al., 2013: Taking action against ocean acidification: a review of
management and policy options. Environ. Manage, 52(4), 761-779,
doi:10.1007/s00267-013-0132-7.

Bindoff, N.L. and PA. Stott, 2013: Detection and Attribution of Climate
Change: from Global to Regional. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group | to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F,
D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, À. Nauels, Y. Xia,
V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.}]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 867-952.

Bisaro, A. and J. Hinkel, 2016: Governance of social dilemmas in climate
change adaptation. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(4), 354-359, doi:10.1038/
nclimate2936.

Black, R., S.R. Bennett, S.M. Thomas and JR. Beddington, 2011: Climate
change: Migration as adaptation. Mature, 478(7370), 447-449,
doi:10.1038/478477a.

Blake, M. P. Considine and B. Edmons, 2017: Report ofthe independent review
into the Tasmanian floods of June and July 2016: Shared responsibility,
resilience and adaptation. Department of Premier and Cabinet (Tasmania),
Hobart, Tasmania, 138 [Available at: www.dpac.tas.gov.au/_ data/assets/
pdf_file/0015/332610/floodreview.pdf].

Bloemen, P., M. Van Der Steen and Z. Van Der Wal, 2018: Designing a century
ahead: climate change adaptation in the Dutch Delta. Policy and Society,
38(1), 58-76, doi:10.1080/14494035.2018.1513731.

Bojinski, S. et al., 2014: The concept of essential climate variables in support
of climate research, applications, and policy. Bull Am. Meteorol Soc.,
95(9), 1431-1443, doi:10.1175/BAMS-D-13-00047.1.

Bond, NA. M.F Cronin, H. Freeland and N. Mantua, 2015: Causes and
impacts of the 2014 warm anomaly in the NE Pacific. Geophys. Res. Letters,
42, 3414-3420, doi:10.1002/2015GL063306.

Boyd, E. et al., 2017: A typology of loss and damage perspectives. Nat. Clim.
Change, 7(10), 723-729, doi:10.1038/nclimate3389.

Chapter 1

Boyd, PW., ST. Lennartz, DM. Glover and S.C. Doney, 2015: Biological
ramifications of climate-change-mediated oceanic multi-stressors. Nat.
Clim. Change, 5(1), 71-79, doi:10.1038/nclimate2441.

Boyd, PW. S. Sundby and H.-0. Pôrtner, 2014: Cross-chapter box on net
primary production in the ocean. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., VR. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
YO. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Lewy, S. MacCracken,
PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY USA, 133-136.

Boyer, T.P. et al, 2013: World Ocean Database 2013.[Levitus, S. and
À. Mishonov (eds.)]. Silver Spring, MD, NOAA Atlas, 209 pp.

Breitburg, D. et al, 2018: Declining oxygen in the global ocean and coastal
waters. Science, 359(6371), eaam7240, doi:10.1126/science.aam7240.
Bronen, R., 2015: Climate-induced community relocations: Using integrated
social-ecological assessments to foster adaptation and resilience. Ecol.

Soc., 20(3), 36, doi:10.5751/ES-07801-200336.

Brügger, À. et al., 2015: Psychological responses to the proximity of climate
change. Wat. Clim. Change, 5(12), 1031-1037, doi:10.1038/nclimate2760.

Brysse, K., N. Oreskes, J. O'Reilly and M. Oppenheimer, 2013: Climate change
prediction: Erring on the side of least drama? Global Environ. Change,
23(1), 327-337, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.10.008.

Burkett, M., 2016: Reading between the red lines: Loss and damage and the
Paris outcome. Climate Law, 6(1—2), 118-129, doi:10.1163/18786561-
00601008.

Burnham, M. Z. Ma and B. Zhang, 2016: Making sense of climate change:
Hybrid _ epistemologies, socio-natural assemblages and smallholder
knowledge. Area, 48(1), 18-26, doi:10.1111/area.12150.

Butler, J. et al, 2014: Framing the application of adaptation pathways for
rural livelihoods and global change in eastern Indonesian islands. G/obal
Environ. Change, 28, 368-382, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.12.004.

Cai, Y. T.M. Lenton andT.S. Lontzek, 2016: Risk of multiple interacting tipping
points should encourage rapid CO2 emission reduction. Wat. Clim. Change,
6(5), 520-525, doi:10.1038/nclimate2964.

Cardona, O.D. et al, 2012: Determinants of risk: Exposure and vulnerability.
In: Managing the risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate
change adaptation — A special report of Working Groups 1 and Il of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) [Field, C.B., V. Barros,
TE Stocker, D. Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach,
G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 65-108.

Carey, M. et al. 2015: Integrated approaches to adaptation and disaster risk
reduction in dynamic socio-cryospheric systems. In: Snow and ice-related
hazard, risks and disasters [Shroder, LE, C. Whiteman and W. Haeberli
(eds.)]. Elsevier, pp. 219-261. ISBN 9780123948496.

Carlisle, K. and RL. Gruby, 2017: Polycentric systems of governance: à
theoretical model for the commons. Policy Stud. 4, 26, doi:10.1111/
psj.12212.

Carpenter, SR. and W.A. Brock, 2008: Adaptive capacity and traps. Ecol Soc.
132), 40.

Carton, LA. G.A. Chepurin and L. Chen, 2018: SODA3: À new ocean climate
reanalysis. { Clim, 31, 6967-6983, doi:10.1175/JCLI-D-18-0149.1.

Cassotta, S., 2012: Environmental Damage Liability Problems in a Multilevel
Context: The Case of the Environmental Liability Directive. Energy and
environmental law & policy series: Supanational and comparative aspects,
Kluwer Law International, 280 pp.

Cassotta, S. and M. Mazza, 2015: Balancing de jure and de facto Arctic
environmental law applied to the oil and gas industry: Linking indigenous
rights, social impact assessment and business in Greenland. The Yearbook
of Polar Law Online, (1), 63-119, doi:10.1163/1876-8814_004.

117

 
 

Chapter 1

Castree, N. et al., 2014: Changing the intellectual climate. Nat. Clim. Change,
4(9), 763-768, doi:10.1038/nclimate2339.

Chandler, D. 2013: Resilience and the autotelic subject: Toward a critique
of the societalization of security. /nt. Political Sociol, 7(2), 210-226,
doi:10.1111/ips.12018.

Chapin, ES., G.P. Kofinas and €. Folke, 2009: Principles of Ecosystem
Stewardship: Resilience-Based Natural Resource Management in à
Changing World. Springer-Verlag, New York, 401 pp.

Charlesworth, B., 2009: Effective population size and patterns of molecular
evolution and variation. Mat. Rev. Genet., 10(3), 195-205, doi:10.1038/
nrg2526.

Charney, J.G. et al. 1979: Carbon Dioxide and Climate: A Scientific Assessment.
Report of an Ad Hoc Study Group on Carbon Dioxide and Climate. National
Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC. 22 pp.

Chen, Y, Z. Li, G. Fang and W. Li, 2018: Large hydrological processes changes
in the transboundary rivers of Central Asia. { Geophys. Res. Atmos.,
123(10), 5059-5069, doi:10.1029/2017jd028184.

Cheng, L. et al, 2018: Taking the pulse of the planet. Fos, 98, 14-16,
doi:10.1029/2017E0081839.

Chilisa, B., 2011: /ndigenous Research Methodologies. SAGE Publications, Los
Angeles, 368 pp.

Chircop, À, S. Coffen-Smout and M.L. McConnell, 2018: Ocean Yearbook 32.
Ocean Yearbook, Brill Nijhoff, 381 pp. ISBN: 9789004367005.

Chung Tiam Fook, T., 2017: Transformational processes for community-focused
adaptation and social change: À synthesis. Cfim. Dev, 9(1), 5-21, doi:10.10
80/17565529.2015.1086294.

Church, JA. et al, 2013: Sea Level Change. In: Climate Change 2013: The
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group 1 to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Stocker, T.F, D. Qin, G.K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1137-1216.

Ciais, P. et al, 2013: Carbon and Other Biogeochemical Cycles. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group |
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Stocker, T.F, D. Qin, G.K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Ciais, P. et al., 2011: Large inert carbon pool in the terrestrial biosphere during
the Last Glacial Maximum. Wat. Geosci, 5, 74-79, doi:10.1038/ngeo1 324.

Colenbrander, D. A. Cartwright and A. Taylor, 2015: Drawing a line in the
sand: Managing coastal risks in the City of Cape Town. S. Afr Geogr
97(1), 1-17, doi:10.1080/03736245.2014.924865.

Collins, M. et al, 2013: Long-term Climate Change: Projections, Commitments
and Irreversibility. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group | to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, T.F, D. Qin,
G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, À. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex
and PM. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1029-1136.

Comyn-Platt, E. et al., 2018: Carbon budgets for 1.5 and 2°C targets lowered
by natural wetland and permafrost feedbacks. Nat. Geosci, 11(8), 568-
573, doi:10.1038/s41561-018-0174-9.

Corner, À. E. Markowitz and N. Pidgeon, 2014: Public engagement with
climate change: The role of human values. W/RESs Clim. Change, 5(3), A11-
422, doi:10.1002/wcc.269.

Cosens, BA. L. Gunderson and B.C. Chaffin, 2018: Introduction to the Special
Feature Practicing Panarchy: Assessing legal flexibility, ecological resilience,
and adaptive governance in regional water systems experiencing rapid
environmental change. Ecol. Soc., 23(1), 4, doi:10.5751/ES-09524-230104.

Cramer, W. et al, 2014: Detection and attribution of observed impacts. In:
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A:
Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth

118

Framing and Context of the Report

Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(Field, C.B., VR. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Bilir,
M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, YO. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel,
AN. Lew, S. MacCracken, PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY USA, 979-1037.

Crate, S. et al, 2017: Permafrost livelihoods: A transdisciplinary review
and analysis of thermokarst-based systems of Indigenous land use.
Anthropocene, 18, 89-104, doi:10.1016/j.ancene.2017.06.001.

Crate, S.A. and A.N. Fedorov, 2013: A methodological model for exchanging
local and scientific climate change knowledge in northeastern Siberia.
Arctic, 66(3), 338-350, doi:10.14430/arctic4312.

Creutzig, F et al, 2018: Towards demand-side solutions for mitigating climate
change. Wat. Clim. Change, 8(4), 260-263, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0121-1.

Cunsolo, À. and N.R. Ellis, 2018: Ecological grief as a mental health response
to climate change-related loss. Nat. Clim. Change, 8(4), 275-281,
doi:10.1038/541558-018-0092-2.

Cunsolo, À. and K. Landman, 2017: Mourning Nature: Hope at the
Heart of Ecological Loss and Grief. McGill-Queen's University Press,
Montreal-Kingston, 360 pp.

Cunsolo Willox, A. et al., 2013: The land enriches the soul: On climatic and
environmental change, affect, and emotional health and well-being in
Rigolet, Nunatsiavut, Canada. Fmote. Space Soc., 6, 14-24, doi:10.1016/).
emospa.2011.08.005.

Czerniewicz, L. S. Goodier and R. Morrell, 2017: Southern knowledge online?
Climate change research discoverability and communication practices. {nf
Commun. Soc., 20(3), 386-405, doi:10.1080/1369118X.2016.1168473.

David-Chavez, D.M. and M.C. Gavin, 2018: A global assessment of Indigenous
community engagement in climate research. Environ. Res. Letters, 13(12),
123005, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aaf300.

De Lucia, V., 2017: The Arctic environment and the BBNJ negotiations. Special
rules for special circumstances? Mar Policy, 86, 234-240, doi:10.1016/j.
marpol.201 7.09.011.

Delworth, T.L. et al., 2017: The central role of ocean dynamics in connecting
the North Atlantic Oscillation to the extratropical component ofthe Atlantic
Multidecadal Oscillation. { Clim, 30(10), 3789-3805, doi:10.1175/
JCLI-D-16-0358.1.

Denton, F et al, 2014: Climate-resilient pathways: adaptation, mitigation,
and sustainable development. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
YO. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1101-1131.

Deser, C., À. Phillips, V. Bourdette and H. Teng, 2012: Uncertainty in climate
change projections: The role of internal variability. Clim. Dyn., 38(34),
527-546, doi:10.1007/500382-010-0977-x.

Dessai, S., M. Hulme, R. Lempert and R.A. Pielke Jr, 2009: Climate prediction:
A limit to adaptation? In: Adapting to Climate Change: Thresholds, Values,
Governance [Adger, W.N. I. Lorenzoni and K. O'Brien (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, pp. 64-78. ISBN: 9780521764858.

Deutsch, C. et al., 2015: Climate change tightens a metabolic constraint on
marine habitats. Science, 348(6239}), 1132-1135, doi:10.1126/science.
aaa1605.

DeWalt, B., 1994: Using indigenous knowledge to improve agriculture
and natural resource management. Hum. Organ., 5302), 123-131,
doi:10.17730/humo.53.2.ku60563817m03n73.

Diaz, S. et al. 2015: A Rosetta Stone for nature's benefits to people. PLoS Biol,
13(1), e1002040, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1002040.

Diaz, $. et al, 2018: Assessing natures contributions to people. Science,
359(6373), 270272, doi:10.1126/science.aap8826.
Framing and Context of the Report

Djalante, R. et al, 2018: Cross Chapter Box 12: Residual risks, limits to
adaptation and loss and damage. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An
IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above
pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat
of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate
poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V, P. Zhaï, H.0. Pôrtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea,
PR. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors,
JLBR. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, MI. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock,
M. Tignor and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. World Meteorological Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland.

Dodman, D. and M. Mitlin, 2013: Challenges for community-based adaptation:
Discovering the potential for transformation. { Int. Dev, 25(5), 640-659,
doi:10.1002/jid.1772.

Douglas, M. and A. Wildavsky, 1983: Risk and Culture. { Policy Anal Manage.
2(2), 221, doi:10.2307/3323308.

Dow, K. et al., 2013: Limits to adaptation. Nat. Clim. Change, 3(4), 305-307,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1847.

Dowell, M. et al, 2013: Strategy towards an architecture for climate
monitoring from space. Committee on Earth Observation Satellites, pp 39.
[Available at: www.wmo.int/pages/prog/sat/.…../ARCH_ strategy-climat
e-architecture-space.pdf].

Downie, C. and M. Williams, 2018: After the Paris Agreement: What Role for
the BRICS in Global Climate Governance? Glob. Policy, 9(3), 398-407,
doi:10.1111/1758-5899.12550.

Durack, P.J, T. Lee, N.T. Vinogradova and D. Stammer, 2016: Keeping the lights
on for global ocean salinity observation. Mat. Clim. Change, 6, 228-231,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2946.

Easterling, D.R. et al, 2000: Climate extremes: Observations, modeling,
and impacts. Science, 289(5487), 2068-2074,  doi:10.1126/
science.289.5487.2068.

Eisenack, K. et al, 2014: Explaining and overcoming barriers to climate
change adaptation. Nat. Clim. Change, 4(10), 867-872, doi:10.1038/
nclimate2350.

Ellsberg, D., 1961: Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms. Q.{ Econ., 75(4),
643-669, doi:10.2307/1884324.

Eriksen, SH, A.J. Nightingale and H. Eakin, 2015: Reframing adaptation: The
political nature of climate change adaptation. G/obal Environ. Change, 35,
523-533, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.09.014.

Escobar A. 2001: Culture sits in places: Reflections on globalism and subaltern
strategies of localization. Political Geogr, 20, 139-174, doi:10.1016/
S0962-6298(00)00064-0.

Eslake, S., 2016: Tasmania Report 2016. Tasmania Chamber of Commerce
and Industry, Hobart, Tasmania, 92 [Available at: www.tcci.com.au/
getattachment/Events/Tasmania-Report-2016/Tasmania-Report-2016-
FINAL.pdf.aspx].

Evans, L.S. et al., 2016: Structural and psycho-social limits to climate change
adaptation in the Great Barrier Reef Region. PloS ONE, 11(3), e0150575,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0150575.

FAO, 2018: The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2018 — Meeting
the sustainable development goals. The State of World Fisheries and
Aquaculture, FAO, Rome, Italy, 210 pp.

Fazey, l. et al., 2016: Past and future adaptation pathways. Clim. Dev, 8(1),
26-44, doi:10.1080/17565529.2014.989192.

Feldman, L. and P. Hart, 2018: Is there any hope? How climate change news
imagery and text influence audience emotions and support for climate
mitigation policies. Risk Anal, 38(3), 585-602, doi:10.1111/risa.12868.

Feldman, L. and PS. Hart, 2016: Using political efficacy messages to increase
climate activism: The mediating role of emotions. Sci Commun., 38(1),
99-127, doi:10.1177/1075547015617941.

Fenichel, E.P. etal., 2016: Wealth reallocation and sustainability under climate
change. Wat. Clim. Change, 6(3), 237-244, doi:10.1038/nclimate2871.

Chapter 1

Fenty, |. D. Menemenlis and H. Zhang, 2017: Global coupled sea ice-ocean state
estimation. Clim. Dyn., 49(3), 931-956, doi:10.1007/500382-015-2796-6.
Few, R. et al, 2017: Transformation, adaptation and development:
relating concepts to practice. Palgrave Commun, 3, doi:10.1057/

palcomms.201 7.92.

Field, C.B. et al, 2014: Technical summary. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., VR. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Biller, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
YO. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Lewy, S. MacCracken,
PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY USA, 35-94.

Field, C.B., M.J. Behrenfeld, J.T. Randerson and P. Falkowski, 1998: Primary
production ofthe biosphere: Integratingterrestrial and oceanic components.
Science, 281(5374), 237-240, doi:10.1126/science.281.5374.237.

Fischer, H. et al, 2018: Palaeoclimate constraints on the impact of 2°C
anthropogenic warming and beyond. Wat Geosci, 11, 474-485,
doi:10.1038/541561-018-0146-0.

Fischer, J. et al, 2015: Advancing sustainability through mainstreaming
a social-ecological systems perspective. Curr Opin. Environ. Sustain., 14,
144-149, doi:10.1016/j.cosust.2015.06.002.

Flato, G. et al. 2013: Evaluation of climate models In: Climate Change 2013:
The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group | to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Stocker, TF, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner M. Tignor, SK. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and PM. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 741-866.

Florano, ER, 2018: Integrated Loss and Damage-Climate Change
Adaptation-Disaster Risk Reduction Framework: The Case of the
Philippines. In: Resilience [Zommers, Z. (ed.}]. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, pp. 317-324.

Flynn, M. et al, 2018: Participatory scenario planning and climate change
impacts, adaptation and vulnerability research in the Arctic. Environmental
Science & Policy, 79, 45-53, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2017.10.012.

Ford, .D. et al, 2016a: Induding indigenous knowledge and experience in
IPCC assessment reports. Nat. Clim. Change, 6 (4), 349-353, doi:10.1038/
nclimate2954.

Ford, JD. et al, 2019: Changing access to ice, land and water in Arctic
communities. Nat. Clim. Change, 9, 335-339, doi:10.1038/s41558-019-
0435-7.

Ford, J.D., N. Couture, T. Bell and D.G. Clark, 2017: Climate change and
Canada's north coast: Research trends, progress, and future directions.
Environmental Reviews, 26(1), 82-92, doi:10.1139/er-201 7-0027.

Ford, J.D. et al., 2016b: Adaptation and indigenous peoples in the United
Nations framework convention on dimate change. Clim. Change, 139(3-
4), 429-443.

Forino, G., J. von Meding and G.J. Brewer, 2015: À conceptual governance
framework for climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction
integration. Int. { Disaster Risk Sc., 6(4), 372-384, doi:10.1007/s13753-
015-0076-z.

Frame, B. et al., 2018: Adapting global shared socio-economic pathways for
national and local scenarios. Clim. Risk Manage., 21, 39-51, doi:10.1016/j.
crm.2018.05.001.

Fretwell, P. et al., 2013: Bedmap2: improved ice bed, surface and thickness
datasets for Antarctica. The Cryosphere, 7, 375-393, doi:10.5194/tc-7-
375-2013.

Frôlicher, TL. and F Joos, 2010: Reversible and irreversible impacts of
greenhouse gas emissions in multi-century projections with the NCAR
global coupled carbon cycle-cimate model. Clim. Dyn., 35(7-8), 1439-
1459, doi:10.1007/500382-009-0727-0.

Frôlicher, TL, K.B. Rodgers, C.A. Stock and W. Cheung, 2016: Sources
of uncertainties in 21st century projections of potential ocean

119

 
 

Chapter 1

ecosystem stressors. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 30(8), 1224-1243,
doi:10.1002/2015GB005338.

Gaire, K., R. Beilin and F. Miller, 2015: Withdrawing, resisting, maintaining and
adapting: Food security and vulnerability in Jumla, Nepal. Reg. Environ.
Change, 15(8), 1667-1678, doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0724-7.

Gallina, V. et al. 2016:A review of multi-risk methodologies fornatural hazards:
Consequences and challenges for a climate change impact assessment.
À Environ. Manage, 168, 123-132, doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2015.11.011.

Gallo, N.D. D.G. Victor and LA. Levin, 2017: Ocean commitments under
the Paris Agreement. Nat. Clim. Change, 7, 833-838, doi:10.1038/
nclimate3422.

Gasser, T. et al, 2015: Negative emissions physically needed to keep global
warming below 2°C. Nat. Commun. 6, 7958, doi:10.1038/ncomms8958.
Gattuso, J.-P. et al, 2014: Ocean Acidification. In: Climate Change 2014:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B. VR. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Biller, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
Y.0. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, ES. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 129-131.

Gattuso, J.-P. et al., 2015: Contrasting futures for ocean and society from
different anthropogenic CO2 emissions scenarios. Science, 349(6243),
4555, doi:10.1126/science.aac4722.

Gattuso, J.-P. et al, 2018: Ocean solutions to address climate change and
its effects on marine ecosystems. Front. Mar. Sci, 5(337), doi:10.3389/
fmars.2018.00337.

Gearheard, S.F et al., 2013: The Meaning of Ice: People and Sea Ice in Three
Arctic Communities. International Polar Institute Press Hanover, New
Hampshire, 366 pp. ISBN: 9780996193856.

Gebbie, G. and P. Huybers, 2012: The mean age of ocean waters inferred from
radiocarbon observations: Sensitivity to surface sources and accounting
for mixing histories. 4 Phys. Oceanogr, 4202), 291-305, doi:10.1175/
JPO-D-11-043.1.

Gerrard, M.B. and G.E. Wannier, 2013: Threatened Island Nations: Legal
implications of rising seas and a changing dimate. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 627 pp. ISBN: 978113919877.

Ghalambor, C.K. et al, 2015: Non-adaptive plasticity potentiates rapid
adaptive evolution of gene expression in nature. Nature, 525(7569), 372—
375, doi:10.1038/nature15256.

Gimeno, L. et al, 2012: Oceanic and terrestrial sources of continental
precipitation. Rev Geophys, 50(4), RG4003, doi:10.1029/2012RG000389.

Gleick, P.H., 1996: Water resources. In: Encyclopedia of Climate and Weather
[Schneider, S.H. (ed.)]. Oxford University Press, New York, pp. 817-823.
ISBN 978-0816063505.

Glibert, PM. et al, 2014: Vulnerability of coastal ecosystems to changes
in harmful algal bloom distribution in response to climate change:
Projections based on model analysis. Glob. Chang. Biol, 20(12), 3845-
3858, doi:10.1111/gcb.12662.

Gobler, €.J. et al., 2017: Ocean warming since 1982 has expanded the niche of
toxic algal blooms in the North Atlantic and North Pacific oceans. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 114(19), 4975-4980, doi:10.1073/pnas.1619575114.

Goldman, M.J. and E. Lovell, 2017: Indigenous Technical Knowledge. In:
international Encyclopedia of Geography: People, the Earth, Environment
and Technology (Richardson, D., N. Castree, M.F Goodchild, A. Kobayashi,
W. Liu and R.A. Marston (eds.)]. Wiley, pp. 1-4. ISBN 9781118786352.

Golledge, NR. et al, 2019: Global environmental consequences of
twenty-first-century ice-sheet melt. Nature, 566, 65-72, doi:10.1038/
s41586-019-0889-9.

Golledge, NR. et al, 2015: The multi-millennial Antarctic commitment
to future sea-level rise. Mature, 526(7573), 421-425, doi:10.1038/
nature15706.

120

Framing and Context of the Report

Graham, l., TW. Plumptre and B. Amos, 2003: Principles for Good Governance
in the 215t Century. 10G Policy Briefs, Institute on Governance Ottawa, 9 pp.

Green, D. J. Billy and A. Tapim, 2010: Indigenous Australian’ knowledge
of weather and climate. Clim. Change, 1002), 337-354, doi:10.1007/
s10584-010-9803-z.

Grip, K., 2017: International marine environmental governance: À review.
Ambio, 46(4), 413-427, doi:10.1007/513280-016-0847-9.

Grosse, G.etal., 2016: Changing permafrost in a warming world and feedbacks
to the Earth system. Environ. Res. Letters, 11(4), 04021, doi:10.1088/1748-
9326/11/4/040201.

Gruber, N. et al, 2019: The oceanic sink for anthropogenic CO2 from 1994
to 2007. Science, 363(6432), 1193-1199, doi:10.1126/science.aau51 53.
Grunblatt, J. and L. Alessa, 2017: Role of perception in determining adaptive
capacity: communities adapting to environmental change. Sustain. Sci,

12(1), 3-13, doi:10.1007/s11625-016-0394-0.

Gupta, AS. N.C. Jourdain, J.N. Brown and D. Monselesan, 2013: Climate
drift in the CMIP5 models. 4 Clim., 26(21), 8597-8615, doi:10.1175/
JCLI_D_12_00521.1.

Haasnoot, M. LH. Kwakkel, W.E. Walker and J. ter Maat, 2013: Dynamic
adaptive policy pathways: A method for crafting robust decisions for
a deeply uncertain world. Global Environ. Change, 23(2), 485-498,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.12.006.

Hall, N. and À. Persson, 2018: Global dimate adaptation governance:
Why is it not legally binding? Eur { Int Relat., 24(3), 540-566,
doi:10.1177/1354066117725157.

Halpern, B.S. et al, 2015: Spatial and temporal changes in cumulative human
impacts on the world's ocean. Nat. Commun., 6, 7615, doi:10.1038/
ncomms8615.

Halpern, BS. et al, 2008: A global map of human impact on marine
ecosystems. Science, 319(5865), 948-952, doi:10.1126/science.1149345.

Hamilton, M.L. and M. Lubell, 2019: Climate change adaptation, social capital,
and the performance of polycentric governance institutions. Clim. Change,
152(3-4), 307-326, doi:10.1007/s10584-019-02380-2.

Hansell, D.A. 2013: Recalcitrant dissolved organic carbon fractions. Annu. Rev.
Mar. Sci, 5(1), 421-445, doi:10.1146/annurev-marine-120710-100757.
Hansen, J. et al., 2016: Ice melt, sea level rise and superstorms: Evidence from
paleoclimate data, climate modeling, and modern observations that 2°C
global warming could be dangerous. Atmos. Chem. Phys., 16(6), 3761-

3812, doi:10.5194/acp-16-3761-2016.

Hansen, J et al, 2007: Climate change and trace gases. Philosophical
Transactions ofthe Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences, 365(1856), 1925-1954, doi:10.1098/rsta.2007.2052.

Hansen, J., M. Sato, P. Kharecha and K. von Schuckmann, 2011: Earth's energy
imbalance and implications. Amos. Chem. Phys., 11(24), 13421-13449,
doi:10.5194/acp-11-13421-2011.

Hansson, S.O. and G. Hirsch Hadorn, 2017: Argument-based decision support
for risk analysis. / Risk Res., 21(12), 1449-1464, doi:10.1080/13669877.
2017.1313767.

Hare, JA. et al. 2016: A vulnerability assessment of fish and invertebrates to
climate change on the Northeast US Continental Shelf. PloS ONE, 11(2),
e0146756, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0146756.

Hastrup, K., À. Mosbech and B. Grennow, 2018: Introducing the North
Water: Histories of exploration, ice dynamics, living resources, and human
settlement in the Thule Region. Ambio, 47(2), 162-174, doi:10.1007/
s13280-018-1030-2.

Hawkins, E. et al, 2017: Estimating changes in global temperature since
the preindustrial period. Bull Am. Meteorol Soc., 98(9), 1841-1856,
doi:10.1175/BAMS-D-16-0007.1.

Hawkins, E. and R. Sutton, 2009: The potential to narrow uncertainty in
regional climate predictions. Bull Am. Meteorol Soc., 90(8), 1095-1108,
doi:10.1175/2009BAMS2607.1.

Hawkins, E. and R. Sutton, 2012: Time of emergence of climate signals.
Geophys. Res. Letters, 39(1), LO1702, doi:10.1029/2011GL050087.
Framing and Context of the Report

Hegerl, G.C. et al, 2010: Good practice guidance paper on detection and
attribution related to anthropogenic climate change. In: Meeting Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Expert Meeting on
Detection and Attribution of Anthropogenic Climate Change [Stocker T.F,
C.B. Field, D. Qin, V. Barros, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, P.M. Midgley and
KL. Ebi (eds.}]. IPCC Working Group | Technical Support Unit, University of
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

Heleniak, T, 2014: Arctic Populations and Migration. Arctic Human
Development Report: Regional Processes and Global Linkages, Nordic
Council of Ministers, Copenhagen. 53-104 pp.

Hijioka, Y. et al., 2014: Asia. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation,
and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects: Working Group Il Contribution
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Barros, VR., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach,
TE. Bili, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma,
ES. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, PR. Mastrandrea and L.L. White
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA, 1327-1370.

Hinkel, J. et al., 2014: Coastal flood damage and adaptation costs under
21st century sea-level rise. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci U.S.A., 111(9), 3292-3297,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1222469111.

Hinners, JL, À. Kremp and I. Hense, 2017: Evolution in temperature-dependent
phytoplankton traits revealed from a sediment archive: Do reaction
norms tell the whole story? Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B., 284(1864), 20171888,
doi:10.1098/rspb.2017.1888.

Hino, M. C.B. Field and K.J. Mach, 2017: Managed retreat as a response
to natural hazard risk. Nat. Clim. Change, 7(5), 364-370, doi:10.1038/
nclimate3252.

Hiwasaki, L, E. Luna and SR. Syamsidik, 2014: Local and indigenous
knowledge for community resilience: Hydro-meteorological disaster risk
reduction and climate change adaptation in coastal and small island
communities. UNESCO, Jakarta, 60 pp. ISBN: 9786029416114.

Hoegh-Guldberg, ©. et al, 2018: Impacts of 1.5°C global warming on
natural and human systems. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special
Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial
levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in
the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of
climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate
poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V, P. Zhaï, H.0. Pôrtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea,
PR. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors,
JLBR. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, MI. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock,
M. Tignor and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. World Meteorological Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland.

Homsy, G.C. Z. Liu and M.E. Warner, 2019: Multilevel governance: Framing
the integration of top-down and bottom-up policymaking. /nt { Public
Adm., 42(7), 572-582.

Horton, B.P, S. Rahmstorf, S.E. Engelhart and A.C. Kemp, 2014: Expert
assessment of sea-level rise by AD 2100 and AD 2300. Quaternary Sci. Rev,
84, 1-6, doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2013.11.002.

Hou, L., J. Huang and J. Wang, 2017: Early warning information, farmers”
perceptions of, and adaptations to drought in China. Clim. Change, 141(2),
197-212, doi:10.1007/510584-017-1900-9.

Hovelsrud, G.K., B. Poppel, B. Van Oort and J.D. Reist, 2011: Arctic societies,
cultures, and peoples in a changing cryosphere. Ambio, 40, 100-110,
doi:10.1007/513280-011-0219-4.

Hu, S. and J. Sprintall, 2016: Interannual variability of the Indonesian
Throughflow: The salinity effect. / Geophys. Res. Oceans, 121(4), 2596-
2615, doi:10.1002/2015JC011495.

Huggel, C. et al., 2019: Loss and damage in the mountain cryosphere. Reg.
Environ. Change, 19(5), 1387-1399, doi:10.1007/s10113-018-1385-8.

Hughes, T.P. et al., 2018: Spatial and temporal patterns of mass bleaching
of corals in the Anthropocene. Science, 359(6371), 80-83, doi:10.1126/
science.aan8048.

Chapter 1

Huntington, H.P., 1992: The Alaska Eskimo Whaling Commission and other
cooperative marine mammal management organizations in northern
Alaska. Polar Rec., 28(165), 119-126, doi:10.1017/S0032247400013413.

Huntington, H.P., 2000: Using traditional ecological knowledge in science:
methods and applications. Ecological Applications, 10(5), 1270-1274,
doi:10.1890/1051-0761(2000)010[1270:UTEKIS]2.0.CO;2.

Huntington, H.P, 2011: Arctic science: The local perspective. Nature,
478(7368), 182-183, doi:10.1038/478182a.

Huntington, H.P. et al, 2017: How small communities respond to
environmental change: Patterns from tropical to polar ecosystems. Ecol
Soc., 22(3), 9.

Huq, $., E. Roberts and A. Fenton, 2013: Loss and damage. Wat. Clim. Change,
3, 947-949, doi:10.1038/nclimate2026.

Huybrechts, P. and J. de Wolde, 1999: The dynamic response of the Greenland
and Antarctic ice sheets to multiple-century climaticwarming.{ Clim., 12 (8),
2169-2188, doi:10.1175/1520-0442(1999)012<2169:TDROTG:>2.0.C0:2.

ICC, 2015: {nuit Circumpolar Council Alaskan Inuit Food Security Conceptual
Framework: How to assess the Arctic from an Inuit perspective. Alaska
[Available at: https:/iccalaska.org/wp-icc/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/
Food-Security-Full-Technical-Report.pdf].

ICC. 2018: People of the Ice Bridge: The Future of the Pikialasorsuaq.
[Available at: http://pikialasorsuaq.org/en/, accessed 23 March].

ICC, 2018: Utgiagvik Declaration. Inuit Circumpolar Council, Utqiagvik,
Alaska [Available at: www.inuitcircumpolar.com/uploads/3/0/5/4/30542
564/2018_utqiagvik_declaration_- final. pdf].

Inniss, L. andA. Simcock, 2017: The First Global Integrated Marine Assessment:
World Ocean Assessment 1. World Ocean Assessment, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 973 pp. ISBN: 9781108186148.

IPBES, 2018a: The IPBES regional assessment report on biodiversity
and ecosystem services for Africa.[Archer, E., L. Dziba, K.J. Mulongoy,
M.A. Maoela and M. Walters (eds.}]. Secretariat of the Intergovernmental
Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem services, Bonn,
Germany, 492 pp. ISBN: 9783947851003.

IPBES, 2018b: The IPBES regional assessment report on biodiversity and
ecosystem services for Asia and the Pacific.[Senaratna Sellamuttu, S,
M. Karki, N. Moriwake and S. Okayasu (eds.)] [Karki, M. S. Senaratna
Sellamuttu, S. Okayasu and W. Suzuki (eds)]. Secretariat of the
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
services, Bonn, Germany, 612 pp. ISBN: 9783947851027.

IPBES, 2018c: The IPBES regional assessment report on biodiversity
and ecosystem services for Europe and Central Asia.[Rounsevell, M.
M. Fischer, A. Torre-Marin Rando and A. Mader (eds.)]. Secretariat of the
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
services, Bonn, Germany, 892 pp. ISBN: 9783947851034.

IPBES, 2018d: The IPBES regional assessment report on biodiversity
and ecosystem services for the Americas. [Rice, J, C.S. Seixas, M.E.
Zaccagnini, M. Bedoya-Gaitän and N. Valderrama (eds.)]. Secretariat of the
Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services, Bonn, Germany, 656 pp. ISBN: 9783947851010.

IPCC, 2000: Emissions Scenarios [Nakicenovic, N. and R. Swart (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 570 pp.

IPCC, 2013: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group | to the Fifth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, TF,
D. Qin, G.<K. Platter, M. Tignor, SK. Allen, J. Boschung, À. Nauels, Y. Xia,
V. Bex and PM. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

IPCC, 2014: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth Assessment Report of
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
YO. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Lewy, S. MacCracken,

121

 
 

Chapter 1

M.PR. and LL. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1-32.

IPCC, 2018: Summary for Policymakers. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C.
An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C
above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission
pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response to the threat
of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate
poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhaï, H.0. Pôrtner, D. Roberts, J. Skea,
PR. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, €. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors,
J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, MI. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock,
M. Tignor and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. World Meteorological Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland, 32 pp.

ITK, 2005: Putting the human face on dimate change: Perspectives from Inuit
in Canada. Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, Nasiwik Centre for Inuit Health and
Changing Environments at Université Laval and the Ajunnginiq Centre at
the National Aboriginal Health Organization, Unikkaaqatigiit [Available at:
www.itk.caAwp-content/uploads/2016/07/unikkaaqatigiit01-1.pdf.].

Jamir, O., 2016: Understanding India-Pakistan water politics since the signing
of the Indus Water Treaty. Water Policy, 18(5), 1070-1087, doï:https://doi.
org/10.2166/wp.2016.185.

Jasanoff, S., 2004: States of knowledge: The co-production of science
and the social order. Routledge, London and New York, 332 pp. ISBN:
9780415403290.

Jiao, N. et al, 2010: Microbial production of recalcitrant dissolved organic
matter: Long-term carbon storage in the global ocean. Nat. Rev Microbio.,
8(8), 593-599, doi:10.1038/nrmicro2386.

Johnson, G.C. et al., 2018: Ocean heat content. In: State of the Climate 2017
[Blunden, J., D.S. Arndt and G. Hartifled (eds.)]. Bull Am. Meteorol. Soc,
99(8), S72-S77.

Jones, H.P. D.G. Hole and E.S. Zavaleta, 2012: Harnessing nature to help
people adapt to climate change. Wat. Clim. Change, 2(7), 504-509,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1463.

Jones, JM. et al, 2016: Assessing recent trends in high-latitude Southern
Hemisphere surface cimate. Nat. Clim. Change, 6@(10), 917-926,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3103.

Jordan, À.J. et al, 2015: Emergence of polycentric climate governance and
its future prospects. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(11), 977-982, doi:10.1038/
nclimate2725.

Jupiter, S.D. et al, 2014: Locally-managed marine areas: Multiple objectives
and diverse strategies. Pac. Conserv. Biol, 20(2), 165-179, doi:10.1071/
PC140165.

Kahneman, D. and P. Egan, 2011: Thinking, fast and slow. Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, New York, 499 pp. ISBN: 9780141033570.

Kainuma, M. et al, 2018: Cross-Chapter Box 1: Scenarios and Pathways. In:
Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global
warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse
gas emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response
to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to
eradicate poverty. [Masson-Delmotte, V, P. Zhaï, H.0. Pôrtner, D. Roberts,
J. Skea, PR. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, €. Péan, R. Pidcock,
S. Connors, J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, MI. Gomis, E. Lonnoy,
T. Maycock, M. Tignor and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. World Meteorological
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 62-64.

Kanna, N. et al., 2018: Upwelling of macronutrients and dissolved inorganic
carbon by a subglacial freshwater driven plume in Bowdoin Fjord,
northwestern Greenland. { Geophys. Res. Biogeosci., 123(5), 1666-1682,
doi:10.1029/2017JG004248.

Karim, M.S., 2015: Prevention of pollution of the marine environment from
vessels: The potential and limits of the International Maritime Organisation.
Springer. ISBN: 9783319106083.

Karki, M. et al, 2017: Knowing our lands and resources: Indigenous and
local knowledge and practices related to biodiversity and ecosystem

122

Framing and Context of the Report

services in Asia. Knowledges of Nature 10, UNESCO, Paris, 212 pp. ISBN:
9789231002106.

Karlsson, M. and G.K. Hovelsrud, 2015: Local collective action: Adaptation
to coastal erosion in the Monkey River Village, Belize. Global Environ.
Change, 32, 96-107, doi:10.1016/.gloenvcha.2015.03.002.

Kaser, G., M. GroBhauser and B. Marzeion, 2010: Contribution potential of
glaciers to water availability in different climate regimes. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci USA, 107, 20223-20227, doi:10.1073/pnas.1008162107.

Keeling, C.D. et al. 1976: Atmospheric carbon dioxide variations at Mauna Loa
observatory, Hawaiïï. Tellus, 28 (6),538-551,doi:10.1111/j.2153-3490.1976.
tb00701 x.

Keller, K.M., F Joos and €. Raible, 2014: Time of emergence of trends in ocean
biogeochemistry. Biogeosciences, 11(13), 3647-3659, doi:10.5194/bg-11-
3647-2014.

Kilroy, G., 2015: A review of the biophysical impacts of climate change in
three hotspot regions in Africa and Asia. Reg. Environ. Change, 15 (5),
771-782, doi:10.1007/510113-014-0709-6.

Kirchmeier-Young, M.C., FEW. Zwiers and NP. Gillett, 2017: Attribution
of extreme events in Arctic sea ice extent. { Clim., 30 (2), 553-571,
doi:10.1175/JCLI-D-16-0412.1.

Klein, R.IT. et al, 2014: Adaptation opportunities, constraints, and limits.
In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A:
Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
(Field, C.B., VR. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Bilir,
M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, YO. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel,
AN. Lew, S. MacCracken, PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY USA, 899-943,

Kleisner, K.M. et al, 2017: Marine species distribution shifts on the US
Northeast Continental Shelf under continued ocean warming. Prog.
Oceanogr., 153, 24-36, doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2017.04.001.

Klenk, N. and K. Meehan, 2015: Climate change and transdisciplinary science:
Problematizing the integration imperative. Environmental Science & Policy,
54, 160-167, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.05.017.

Klinsky, S. et al, 2016: Why equity is fundamental in climate change
policy research. Global Environ. Change, 44, 170-173, doi:10.1016/i.
gloenvcha.2016.08.002.

Knight, FH. 1921: Risk, uncertainty and profit. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, 381 pp. ISBN: 9781614276395.

Knoblauch, C. et al. 2018: Methane production as key to the greenhouse gas
budget of thawing permafrost. Nat. Clim. Change, 8(4), 309, doi:10.1038/
s41558-018-0095-z.

Knutson, T. et al, 2017: Detection and attribution of climate change. In:
Climate Science Special Report: Fourth National Climate Assessment,
Volume I.U.S. Global Change Research Program, Washington DC, USA,
pp.114-132.

Knutti, R.F, TE Stocker and A. Timmermann, 2004: Strong hemispheric
coupling of glacial climate through freshwater discharge and ocean
circulation. Nature, 430(7002), 851-856, doi:10.1038/nature02786.

Kofinas, G. et al, 2013: Adaptive and transformative capacity. In: Arctic
Resilience interim Report to the Arctic Council Stockholm Environment
Institute and Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm, pp. 71-91. ISBN:
9789186125424,.

Koivurova, T., 2016: Arctic resources: Exploitation of natural resources in the
arctic from the perspective of international law. In: Research Handbook
on International Law and Natural Resources [Morgera, E. and K. Kulovesi
(eds.)]. Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 349-367. ISBN: 9781783478323.

Kokelj, S.V.etal. 2015: Increased precipitation drives mega slump development
and destabilization of ice-rich permafrost terrain, northwestern Canada.
Glob. Planet. Change, 129, 56-68, doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2015.02.008.
Framing and Context of the Report

Kopp, RE, RL. Shwom, G. Wagner and J. Yuan, 2016: Tipping elements
and climate-economic shocks: Pathways toward integrated assessment.
Earth's Future, 4(8), 346-372, doi:10.1002/2016FF000362.

Kriegler, E. et al., 2016: Fossil-fueled development (SSP5): an energy and
resource intensive scenario for the 21st century. G/obal Environ. Change,
42, 297-315, doi:10.1016/.gloenvcha.2016.05.015.

Kulonen, K., Adler, C., Bracher, C., and S. Wymann von Dach, 2019: Spatial
context matters for monitoring and reporting on SDGs: Reflections based
on research in mountain regions. GA/A, 28(2), 90-94(5), doi.org/10.14512/
gaia.28.2.5.

Kummu, M. et al., 2016: Over the hills and further away from coast: global
geospatial patterns of human and environment over the 20th-21st
centuries. Environ. Res. Letters, 11(3), 034010, doi:10.1088/1748-
9326/11/3/034010.

Lagerloef, G. R. Schmitt, J Schanze and H.-Y. Kao, 2010: The ocean and
the global water cycle. Oceanography, 23(4), 82-93, doi:10.5670/
oceanog.2010.07.

Lavrillier, À. and S. Gabyshev, 2017: An Arctic indigenous knowledge system
of landscape, climate, and human interactions. Evenki Reindeer Herders
and Hunters, Studies in Social and Cultural Anthropology, SEC Publications,
Kulturstiftung Sibirien, Fürstenberg/Havel, Germany, 467 pp. ISBN:
9783942883313.

Lavrillier, A. and S. Gabyshev, 2018: An emic science of climate: À reindeer
evenki environmental knowledge and the notion of an extreme process
of change. In: Human-environment relationships in Siberia and Northeast
China: Skills, rituals, mobility and politics among the Tungus peoples
[Lavrillier, A. A. Dumont and D. Brandisauskas (eds.}]. EMSCAT, 49.

Lawrence, J. et al., 2018: National guidance for adapting to coastal hazards
and sea-level rise: Anticipating change, when and how to change
pathway. Environmental Science & Policy, 82, 100-107, doi:10.1016/i.
envsci.2018.01.012.

Le Quéré, C. et al., 2018: Global Carbon Budget 2018. Farth Syst. Sci Data,
10(4), doi:10.5194/essd-10-2141-2018.

LeBlanc, D. €. Freire and M. Vierros, 2017: Mapping the linkages between
oceans and other Sustainable Development Goals. DESA Working Paper No.
149, ST/ESA/2017/DWP/149 [Available at: www.un.org/en/development/
desa/pal.

Lee, T.M. et al, 2015: Predictors of public climate change awareness and
risk perception around the world. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(11), 1014-1020,
doi:10.1038/nclimate2728.

Lele, S., V. Srinivasan, B.K. Thomas and P. Jamwal, 2018: Adapting to climate
change in rapidly urbanizing river basins: Insights from a multiple-concerns,
multiple-stressors, and multi-level approach. Water Int., 43(2), 281-304,
doi:10.1080/02508060.201 7.1416442.

Lellouche, J. et al, 2018: Recent updates on the Copernicus Marine Service
global ocean monitoring and forecasting real-time 1/12 high resolution
system. Ocean Sci, 14(5), 1093-1126, doi:10.5194/0s-2018-15.

Lempert, R.J, S.W. Popper and S.C. Bankes, 2003: Shaping the next one
hundred years: New methods for quantitative, long-term policy analysis.
RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, 186 pp. ISBN: 9780833032751.

Lempert, R.J, S.W. Popper and S.C. Bankes, 2010: Robust Decision Making:
Coping with Uncertainty. The Futurist, 44(1), 47-48.

Lenton, T.M. et al., 2008: Tipping elements in the Earth's climate system. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci USA., 1056), 1786-1793, doi:10.1073/pnas.0705414105.

Lin, P-F et al, 2016: Long-term surface air temperature trend and the possible
impact on historical warming in CMIP5 models. Atmos. Ocean Sci Letters,
9(3), 153-161, doi:10.1080/16742834.2016.1159911.

Lindgren, À. G. Hugelius and P. Kuhry, 2018: Extensive loss of past permafrost
carbon but a net accumulation into present-day soils. Nature, 560 (7717),
219-222, doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0371-0.

Liu, J. et al, 2016: Has Arctic sea ice loss contributed to increased surface
melting of the Greenland ice sheet? / Clim, 29(9), 3373-3386,
doi:10.1175/JCLI-D-15-0391.1.

Chapter 1

Lüthi, D. et al, 2008: High-resolution carbon dioxide concentration
record 650,000-800,000 years before present. Nature, 453, 379-382,
doi:10.1038/nature06949.

Mach, K.J., M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Bilir and C.B. Field, 2016: Understanding and
responding to danger from climate change: The role of key risks in the IPCC
ARS. Clim. Change, 136(3-4), 427-444, doi:10.1007/510584-016-1645-x.

Mach, KI, MD. Mastrandrea, PT. Freeman and C.B. Field, 2017: Unleashing
expert judgment in assessment. Global Environ. Change, 44, 1-14,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2017.02.005.

Magnan, AK. and T. Ribera, 2016: Global adaptation after Paris. Science,
352(6291), 1280-1282, doi:10.1126/science.aaf5002.

Maier, H.R. et al, 2016: An uncertain future, deep uncertainty, scenarios,
robustness and adaptation: How do they fit together? Environ. Model.
Soft., 81, 154-164, doi:10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.03.014.

Maldonado, J. et al, 2016: Engagement with indigenous peoples and
honoring traditional knowledge systems. Clim. Change, 135(1), 111-126,
doi:10.1007/510584-015-1535-7.

Marchau, VAW.J, WE. Walker, PJTM. Bloemen and S.W. Popper, Eds.
2019a: Decision making under deep uncertainty: from theory to practice.
Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, 400 pp. ISBN:
9783030052522.

Marchau, VAW.J, W.E. Walker, PJTM. Bloemen and SW. Popper, 2019b:
Introduction. In: Decision making under deep uncertainty: From theory to
practice [Marchau, VA.W.J, W.E. Walker, PJT.M. Bloemen and S.W. Popper
(eds.)]. Springer International Publishing, Cham, Switzerland, pp. 1-20.
ISBN: 9783030052522.

Markham, À. E. Osipova, K. Lafrenz Samuels and A. Caldas, 2016: Worid
heritage and tourism in a changing climate. United Nations Environment
Programme, Nairobi, Kenya and United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization, Paris, France, 104 pp. ISBN: 9789231001529.

Maru, YT. et al, 2014: A linked vulnerability and resilience framework for
adaptation pathways in remote disadvantaged communities. G/obal
Environ. Change, 28, 337-350, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.12.007.

Masson-Delmotte, V. et al., 2013: Information from paleoclimate archives. In:
Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group | to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change [Stocker, TF. D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, SK. Allen,
J. Boschung, À. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.}]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,
383-464.

Mastrandrea, M.C. et al, 2010: Guidance Note for Lead Authors of the
IPCC Fifth Assessment Report on Consistent Treatment of Uncertainties.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) [Available at:
www.ipcc.ch].

Matsumoto, K. 2007: Radiocarbon-based circulation age ofthe world oceans.
À Geophys. Res. Oceans, 112, C09004, doi:10.1029/2007/C004095.

Mayer, B. and F. Crépeau, 2017: Research Handbook on Climate Change
Migration and the Law. Edward Elgar Publishing, Cheltenham, UK,
Northampton, MA, USA. ISBN: 9781785366581.

Mazloff, MR. P. Heimbach and C. Wunsch, 2010: An eddy-permitting
Southern Ocean state estimate. { Phys. Oceanogr, 40(5), 880-899,
doi:10.1175/2009/P04236.1.

McGuire, A.D. et al, 2018: Dependence of the evolution of carbon
dynamics in the northemn permafrost region on the trajectory of climate
change. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. U.S.A.S, 115(15, 3882-3887, doi:10.1073/
pnas.1719903115.

McLeman, R.A. and L.M. Hunter, 2010: Migration in the context of vulnerability
and adaptation to climate change: Insights from analogues. WiRes. Clim.
Change, 16), 450-461, doi:10.1002Awcc.51.

McNamara, K.E. and R. Westoby, 2011: Solastalgia and the gendered nature
of climate change: An example from Erub Island, Torres Strait. EcoHealth,
8(2}, 233-236, doi:10.1007/s10393-011-0698-6.

123

 
 

Chapter 1

McQuatters-Gollop, À. et al., 2015: The Continuous Plankton Recorder survey:
How can long-term phytoplankton datasets contribute to the assessment
of Good Environmental Status? Fstuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science, 162,
88-97, doi:10.1016/j.ecss.2015.05.010.

MEA, 2005: Ecosystems and human well-being: Synthesis. World Resources
Institute, New Island Press, Washington, DC, 155 pp. ISBN: 9781597260404.

Mechler, R. et al., 2018: Loss and damage from dimate change. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, New York NY. 557 pp. ISBN: 9783319720258.

Mekonnen, Z., H. Kassa, T. Woldeamanuel and Z. Asfaw, 2019: Analysis of
observed and perceived climate change and variability in Arsi Negele
District, Ethiopia. Environ. Dev Sustain., 20(3), 1191-1212, doi:10.1007/
s10668-017-9934-8.

Merkens, LL, L. Reimann, J. Hinkel and AT. Vafeidis, 2016: Gridded population
projections for the coastal zone under the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways.
Glob. Planet. Change, 145, 57-66, doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2016.08.009.

Merrey, D.J. et al, 2018: Evolving high altitude livelihoods and climate
change: A study from Rasuwa District, Nepal. Food Security, 10(4), 1055—
1071, doi:10.1007/512571-018-0827-y.

Mewhirter, J., M. Lubell and R. Berardo, 2018: Institutional externalities and
actor performance in polycentric governance systems. Environmental
Policy and Governance, 28(4), 295-307, doi:10.1002/eet.1816.

Milfont, TL, M.S. Wilson and C.G. Sibley, 2017: The public's belief in climate
change and its human cause are increasing over time. PloS ONE, 12 (3),
e0174246, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0174246.

Miller, D.D. et al., 2018: Adaptation strategies to climate change in marine
systems. Glob. Chang. Biol, 24(1), e1-e14, doi:10.1111/gcb.13829.

Miloslavich, P. et al, 2018: Essential ocean variables for global sustained
observations of biodiversity and ecosystem changes. G/ob. Chang. Biol,
24(6), 2416-2433, doi:10.1111/gcb.14108.

Mistry, J. and A. Berardi, 2016: Bridging indigenous and scientific knowledge.
Science, 352(6291), 1274-1275, doi:10.1126/science.aaf1l 160.

Molden, D.J. A.B. Shrestha, S. Nepal and W.W. Immerzeel, 2016: Downstream
implications of climate change in the Himalayas. In: Water security, dimate
change and sustainable development. Springer, Singapore, pp. 65-82.
ISBN: 9789812879769.

Moore, M.-L. et al, 2014: Studying the complexity of change: Toward an
analytical framework for understanding deliberate social-ecological
transformations. Ecol Soc., 19(4), 54, doi:10.5751/ES-06966-190454.

Mora, C. et al, 2013: The projected timing of climate departure from recent
variability. Mature, 502(7470), 183-187, doi:10.1038/nature12540.

Moser, S.C., 2016: Reflections on climate change communication research
and practice in the second decade of the 21st century: What more is there
to say? WiRes Clim. Change, 7(3), 345-369, doi:10.1002Awcc.403.

Moss, R. et al., 2008: Towards new scenarios for analysis of emissions, climate
change impacts and response strategies. IPCC Expert Meeting Report, 25 pp.

Moss, RH. et al, 2010: The next generation of scenarios for climate change
research and assessment. Nature, 463, 747-756, doi:10.1038/nature08823

www.nature.com/articles/nature08823#supplementary-information.

Motta, M. 2018: The enduring effect of scientific interest on trust in
climate scientists in the United States. Nat. Clim. Change, 8(6), 485-488,
doi:10.1038/541558-018-0126-9.

Mourey, J. and L. Ravanel, 2017: Evolution of Access Routes to High
Mountain Refuges of the Mer de Glace Basin (Mont Blanc Massif, France):
An Example of Adapting to Climate Change Effects in the Alpine High
Mountains. Journal of Alpine Research | Revue de géographie alpine,
105(4), doi:10.4000/rga.3790.

Murakami, H. et al, 2018: Dominant effect of relative tropical Atlantic
warming on major hurricane occurrence. Science, 362(6416), 794-799,
doi:10.1126/science.aat6711.

Myers, T.A., M.C. Nisbet, E.W. Maibach and A.A. Leiserowitz, 2012: À public
health frame arouses hopeful emotions about climate change. Clim.
Change, 113(3-4), 1105-1112, doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0513-6.

124

Framing and Context of the Report

Myhre, G. et al., 2013: Anthropogenic and natural radiative forcing. In: Climate
Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group |
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Stocker, T.F, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
À. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and PM. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY USA, 658-740.

Mysiak, JL et al, 2018: Brief communication: Strengthening coherence
between climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction. Nat. Hazar
Earth Sys. Sci, 18(11), 3137-3143, doi:10.5194/nhess-18-3137-2018.

Nadeem, S., !. Elahi, À. Hadi and I. Uddin, 2012: Fraditional knowledge and
local institutions support adaptation to water-induced hazards in Chitral
Pakistan. ICIMOD, Kathmandu, 51 pp.

Nakashima, D. et al., 2012: Weathering uncertainty: Traditional knowledge for
dimate change assessment and adaptation. United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization and United Nations University, Paris/
Darwin. 120 pp. ISBN: 9789230010683.

Nalau, J. et al, 2018: The role of indigenous and traditional knowledge in
ecosystem-based adaptation: À review of the literature and case studies
from the Pacific Islands. Weather Clim. Soc., 10(4), 851-865, doi:10.1175/
WCAS-D-18-0032.1.

National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, 2019: Negative
Emissions Technologies and Reliable Sequestration: À Research Agenda.
The National Academies Press, Washington, DC. ISBN: 9780309484527.

Neef, À. et al., 2018: Climate adaptation strategies in Fiji: The role of social
norms and cultural values. World Dev, 107, 125-137, doi:10.1016/).
worlddev.2018.02.029.

Nickels, S., C. Furgal, M. Buell and H. Moquin, 2005: Putting the human face
on climate change: Perspectives from Inuit in Canada. Joint publication
of Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, Nasivvik Centre for Inuit Health and Changing
Environments at Université Laval and the Ajunnginiq Centre at the National
Aboriginal Health Organization, Ottawa, 123 pp. ISBN: 9780969977414.

NOAA. 2018: National Centers for Environmental Information, 2018: State of the
Climate: Hurricanes and Tropical Storms for Annual 2017. [Available at: www.
ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/tropical-cyclones/201713, accessed September 13].

North, D.C., 1990: A transaction cost theory of politics. { Theor Polit, 2(4),
355-367, doi:10.1177/0951692890002004001.

Nunn, PD. and N.J. Reid, 2016: Aboriginal memories of inundation of the
Australian coast dating from more than 7000 years ago. Aust. Geogr,
47(1), 11-47, doi:10.1080/00049182.2015.1077539.

Nüsser, M. and S. Schmidt, 2017: Nanga Parbat revisited: Evolution and
dynamics of sociohydrological interactions in the Northwestern Himalaya.
Ann. Am. Assoc. Geogr, 107(2), 403-415, doi:10.1080/24694452.2016.1
235495.

O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2017: IPCC reasons for concern regarding climate change
risks. Nat. Clim. Change, 7(1), 28-37, doi:10.1038/nclimate3179.

O'Neill, B.C. et al, 2016: The scenario model intercomparison project
{ScenarioMIP) for CMIP6. Geosci Model Dev, 9(9), 3461-3482,
doi:10.5194/gmd-9-3461-2016.

O'Neill, SJ. and S. Graham, 2016: (En}visioning place-based adaptation to
sea-level rise. Geography and Environment, 3(2), 1-16, doi:10.1002/geo2.28.

O'Neill, B.C. et al., 2017: The roads ahead: Narratives for shared socioeconomic
pathways describing world futures in the 21st century. Global Environ.
Change, 42, 169-180, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.01.004.

Obermeister, N., 2017: From dichotomy to duality: Addressing interdisciplinary
epistemological barriers to inclusive knowledge governance in global
environmental assessments. Environmental Science & Policy, 68, 80-86,
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2016.11.010.

Ogunbode, C.A. et al, 2018: The resilience paradox: Flooding experience,
coping and climate change mitigation intentions. Clim. Policy, 19(6), 703—
715, doi:10.1080/14693062.2018.1560242.

Olsen, À. et al, 2016: The Global Ocean Data Analysis Project version 2
(GLODAPV2) — an internally consistent data product for the world ocean.
Earth Syst. Sci Data, 8(2), 297-323, doi:10.5194/essd-8-297-2016.
Framing and Context of the Report

Olsson, L. et al, 2017: Why resilience is unappealing to social science:
Theoretical and empirical investigations of the scientific use of resilience.
In: The Routledge Handbook of International Resilience [Chandler, D. and J.
Coaffe (eds.)]. Routledge. 402 pp. ISBN: 9781138784321.

Olsson, L. et al, 2014: Livelihoods and poverty. In: Climate Change 2014:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B, VR. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Biller, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
YO. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 793-832.

Oppenheimer, M. et al, 2014: Emergent Risks and Key Vulnerabilities. In:
Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A:
Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Field, C.B., VR. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Biller,
M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, YO. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel,
AN. Lew, S. MacCracken, PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY USA, 1039-1099.

Oschlies, À. P. Brandt, L. Stramma and S. Schmidtko, 2018: Drivers and
mechanisms of ocean deoxygenation. Wat. Geosci, 11, 467-473,
doi:10.1038/541561-018-0152-2.

Ostrom, E., 2005: Understanding institutional diversity. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ, 355 pp. ISBN: 9780691122380.

Ostrom, E., 2010: Polycentric systems for coping with collective action and
global environmental change. Global Environ. Change, 20(4), 550-557,
doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2010.07.004.

Otto, FE. 2017:Attribution of weather and climate events. Annu. Rev. Environ.
Resour, 42, 627-646, doi:10.1146/annurev-environ-102016-060847.

Paavola, J, 2007: Institutions and environmental  governance:
À reconceptualization. Eco. Econ., 63(1), 93-103, doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.
2006.09.026.

Pacific Community, 2016: Framework for resilient development in the Pacific:
An integrated approach to address climate change and disaster risk
management (FRDP). Pacific Community, Suva, Fiji 32 pp. [Available at:
http://gsd.spc.int/frdp/assets/FRDP_2016_Resilient_Dev_pacific.pdf].

Padmanabhan, M. 2017: Fransdisciplinary Research and Sustainability:
Collaboration, Innovation and Transformation. Routledge. 443 pp. ISBN:
9781138216402.

PAGES2K Consortium, 2017: A global multiproxy database for temperature
reconstructions of the Common Era. Scientific Data, 4, 170088,
doi:10.1038/sdata.2017.88.

Pahl-Wostl, C., 2019: The role of governance modes and meta-governance in
the transformation towards sustainable water governance. Environmental
Science & Policy, 91, 6-16, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2018.10.008.

Pahl-Wostl, €, À Bhaduri and À. Bruns, 2018: Editorial special issue:
The Nexus of water, energy and food — An environmental governance
perspective. Environmental Science & Policy, 90, 161-163, doi:10.1016/i.
envsci.2018.06.021.

Palmer, M.D. and DJ. McNeall, 2014: Internal variability of Earth's energy
budget simulated by CMIP5 climate models. Environ. Res. Letters, 9(3),
034016, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/9/3/034016.

Parmesan, C., TL. Root and M.R. Willig, 2000: Impacts of extreme weather
and climate on terrestrial biota. Bull Am. Meteorol Soc., 81(3), 443-450,
doi:10.1175/1520-0477(2000)081<0443:I0EWAC->2.3.C0:2.

Parveen, S., M. Winiger, S. Schmidt and M. Nüsser, 2015: Irrigation in
Upper Hunza: Evolution of socio-hydrological interactions in the
Karakoram, northern Pakistan. Erdkunde, 69(1), 69-85, doi:10.3112/
erdkunde.2015.01.05.

Pelling, M., K. O'Brien and D. Matyas, 2015: Adaptation and transformation.
Clim. Change, 133, 113-127, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1303-0.

Chapter 1

Pespeni, MH. et al, 2013: Evolutionary change during experimental
ocean acidification. Proc. Nat! Acad. Sci US.A., 110(17), 6937-6942,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1220673110.

Peters, G.P. et al. 2012: The challenge to keep global warming below 2°C. Nat.
Clim. Change, 3(1), 4-6, doi:10.1038/nclimate1783.

Petersen, A.C. 2011: Climate simulation, uncertainty, and policy advice-the
case of the IPCC. In: Climate Change and Policy: The Calculability of Climate
Change and the Challenge of Uncertainty [Gramelsberger, G. and J. Feichter
(eds.)]. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 91-111. ISBN: 9783642177002.

Philip, T., 2018: Climate change displacement and migration: An analysis of the
current international legal regime's deficiency, proposed solutions and à way
forward for Australia. Melbourne Journal of International Law, 19, 27 pp.

Pierre, J. and G. Peters, 2000: Governance, Politics, and the State. St. Martin's
Press. 240 pp. ISBN: 9780333718483.

Pincus, R. and S.H. Ali, 2015: Diplomacy on Ice: Energy and the Environment
in the Arctic and Antarctic. Yale University Press, 304 pp. ISBN:
9780300205169.

Pistone, K., I. Eisenman and V Ramanathan, 2014: Observational
determination of albedo decrease caused by vanishing Arctic sea ice. Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci US.A., 111(9), 3322-3326, doi:10.1073/pnas.1318201111.

Pôrtner, H.-O. et al., 2014: Ocean Systems. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., VR. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Biller, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
YO. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Lewy, S. MacCracken,
PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY USA, 411-484.

Pratchett, M.S. et al., 2011: Vulnerability of coastal fisheries in the tropical
Pacific to climate change. In: Wwinerability of Tropical Pacific Fisheries and
Aquaculture to Climate Change [Bell J.D., LE. Johnson and A.J. Hobday
(eds.)]. Secretariat of the Pacific Community, Noumea, pp. 493-576. ISBN:
9789820005082.

Prescott, S.L. and A.C. Logan, 2018: Larger than life: Injecting hope into
the planetary health paradigm. Challenges, 9(13), 1-27, doi:10.3390/
challe9016013.

Przeslawski, R., M. Byrne and C. Mellin, 2015: A review and meta-analysis
of the effects of multiple abiotic stressors on marine embryos and larvae.
Glob. Chang. Biol, 21 (6), 2122-2140, doi:10.1111/gcb.12833.

PSMSL. Permanent Service for Mean Sea Level. [Available at: www.psmslorg].

Purich, À. et al, 2018: Impacts of broad-scale surface freshening of the
Southern Ocean in a coupled climate model.  Clim., 31(7), 2613-2632,
doi:10.1175/ICLI-D-17-0092.1.

Qian, H. R. Joseh and N. Zeng, 2010: Enhanced terrestrial carbon uptake in
the Northern High Latitudes in the 21st century from the Coupled Carbon
Cycle Climate Model Intercomparison Project model projections. G/ob.
Chang. Biol, 16(2), 641-656, doi:10.1111/j.1365-2486.2009.01989 x.

Quinlan, AE, M. Berbés-Bläzquez, L.J. Haider and G.D. Peterson, 2016:
Measuring and assessing resilience: Broadening understanding through
multiple disciplinary perspectives. { App Ecol, 53(3), 677-687,
doi:10.1111/1365-2664.12550.

Ramm, TD. C.J. White, A.H.C. Chan and C.S. Watson, 2017: A review of
methodologies applied in Australian practice to evaulate long-term
coastal adaptation options. Clim. Risk Manage., 17, 35-51, doi:10.1016/.
crm.2017.06.005.

Rasul, G., 2014: Food, water, and energy security in South Asia: À nexus
perspective from the Hindu Kush Himalayan region. Environmental Science
& Policy, 39, 35-48, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2014.01.010.

Raup, BH, L.M. Andreassen, T. Bolch and S. Bevan, 2015: Remote Sensing of
Glaciers. In: Remote Sensing of the Cryosphere [Tedesco, M. (ed.)]. Wiley
Blackwell, pp. 123-156. ISBN: 9781118368855.

Redman, C.L.,, 1999: Human Impact on Ancient Environments. University of
Arizona Press, Tuscon, 256 pp. ISBN: 9780816519637.

125

 
 

Chapter 1

Reid, J., 2013: Interrogating the neoliberal biopolitics of the sustainable
development-resilience nexus. /nt. Political Sociol, 7(4), 353-367,
doi:10.1111/ips.12028.

Renaud, FG. et al., 2015: Resilience and shifts in agro-ecosystems facing
increasing sea-level rise and salinity intrusion in Ben Tre Province, Mekong
Delta. Clim. Change, 133(1), 69-84, doi:10.1007/510584-014-1113-4.

Renaud, FG., U. Nehren, K. Sudmeier-Rieux and M. Estrella, 2016:
Developments and Opportunities for Ecosystem-Based Disaster Risk
Reduction and Climate Change Adaptation. In: Ecosystem-Based Disaster
Risk Reduction and Adaptation in Practice [Renaud, F.G., K. Sudmeier-Rieux,
M. Estrella and U. Nehren (eds.)]. Springer International Publishing,
Switzerland, pp.1-20. ISBN: 9783319436319.

Rhein, M. et al., 2013: Observations: Ocean. In: Climate Change 2013: The
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group 1 to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Stocker, T.F, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J Boschung,
À. Nauels, Y. Xia, V.B. And and P.M. Midgley (eds.}]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 255-315.

Rhines, P., S. Häkkinen and S.A. Josey, 2008: Is oceanic heat transport
significant in the climate system? In: Arctic-Subarctic Ocean Fluxes
[Dickson, R.R., J Meincke and P. Rhines (eds.)]. Springer, Dordrecht,
pp. 87-109. ISBN: 9781402067730.

Riahi, K. et al., 2011: RCP 8.5 — a scenario of comparatively high greenhouse
gas emissions. Clim. Change, 109, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0149-y.

Riahi K. et al, 2017:The Shared Socioeconomic Pathways and'their energy, land
use, and greenhouse gas emissions implications: An overview. Global
Environ. Change, 42, 153-168, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.05.009.

Rice, W.R., 2002: Evolution of sex: Experimental tests of the adaptive
significance of sexual recombination. Mat. Rev. Genet., 3(4), 241-251,
doi:10.1038/nrg760.

Rigg, J. and K. Oven, 2015: Building liberal resilience? A critical review from
developing rural Asia. Global Environ. Change, 32, 175-186, doi:10.1016/.
gloenvcha.2015.03.007.

Riser, S.C. et al., 2016: Fifteen years of ocean observations with the global
Argo array. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(2), 145-153, doi:10.1038/nclimate2872.

Roberts, C.M. et al, 2017: Marine reserves can mitigate and promote
adaptation to climate change. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci U.SA., 114, 6167-
6175, doi:10.1073/pnas.1701262114.

Rodgers, K., J. Lin and T. Frôlicher, 2015: Emergence of multiple ocean
ecosystem drivers in a large ensemble suite with an Earth system model.
Biogeosciences, 12(11), 3301-3320, doi:10.5194/bg-12-3301-2015.

Roggero, M. A. Bisaro and S. Villamayor-Tomas, 2017: Institutions in the climate
adaptation literature: À systematic literature review through the lens of the
Institutional Analysis and Development framework. Journal of Institutional
Economics, 14(3), 423-448, doi:10.1017/S1744137417000376.

Roggero, M. et al, 2018: Introduction to the special issue on adapting
institutions to climate change. Journal of Institutional Economics, 14(3),
409-422, doi:10.1017/$1744137417000649.

Rohe, JR. S. Aswani, A. Schlüter and S.C. Ferse, 2017: Multiple drivers of
local (non-) compliance in community-ased marine resource management:
case studies from the South Pacific. Front. Mar. Sci, 4, 172, doi:10.3389/
fmars.2017.00172.

Romero-Lankao, P. et al, 2014: North America. In: Climate Change 2014:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects:
Working Group Il Contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., VR. Barros, D.J.
Dokken, K.J Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Biller, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
Y.0. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, ES. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1439-1498.

Roncoli, C., T. Crane and B. Orlove, 2009: Fielding Climate Change in Cultural
Anthropology. In: Anthropology and Climate Change: From Encounters to

126

Framing and Context of the Report

Actions [Crate, S. and M. Nuttall (eds.}]. Left Coast Press, Walnut Creek, CA,
pp. 87-115. ISBN: 9781598743340.

Roué, M. N. Césard, N.C. Adou Yao and À. Oteng-Yeboah, 2017: Knowing
our lands and resources: Indigenous and local knowledge of biodiversity
and ecosystem services in Africa. Knowledges of Nature 8, UNESCO, Paris.
156 pp. ISBN: 9789231002083.

Roué, M. and Z. Molnar, 2017: Knowing our lands and resources: indigenous
and local knowledge of biodiversity and ecosystem services in Europe
and Central Asia. Knowledges of Nature 9, UNESCO, Paris. 148 pp. ISBN:
9789231002106.

Roy, J, P. Tschakert, H. Waisman and S.A. Halim, 2018: Sustainable
development, poverty eradication and reducing inequalities. In: Global
Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming
of 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas
emission pathways, in the context of strengthening the global response
to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to
eradicate poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V. P. Zhaï, H.0. Pôrtner, D. Roberts,
J. Skea, PR. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, €. Péan, R. Pidcock,
S. Connors, L.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M. Gomis, E. Lonnoy,
T. Maycock, M. Tignor and T. Waterfield (eds.)]. World Meteorological
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

Royal Society, 2018 Greenhouse Gas Removal. Royal Academy of
Engineering, London, UK [Available at: https://royalsociety.org/-/media/
policy/projects/greenhouse-gas-removal/royal-society-greenhouse-ga
s-removal-report-2018.pdf].

Ryan, PA. and À. Münchow, 2017: Sea ice draft observations in Nares
Strait from 2003 to 2012. { Geophys. Res. Oceans, 122(4), 3057-3080,
doi:10.1002/20161C011966.

Sabel, C.F and D.G. Victor, 2017: Governing global problems under uncertainty:
Making bottom-up climate policy work. Clim. Change, 144(1), 15-27.

Sanderson, B.M., B.C. O'Neill and C. Tebaldi, 2016: What would it take to
achieve the Paris temperature targets? Geophys. Res. Letters, 43(13),
7133-7142, doi:10.1002/2016GL069563.

Sarmiento, J.L. and N. Gruber, 2002: Sinks for anthropogenic carbon. Physics
Today, 55(8), 30-36, doi:10.1063/1.1510279.

Sarmiento, JL. and N. Gruber, 2006: Ocean Biogeochemical Dynamics.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey, 528 pp. ISBN:
9780691017075.

Savo, V. et al, 2016: Observations of climate change among
subsistence-oriented communities around the world. Wat. Clim. Change,
6(5), 462-473, doi:10.1038/nclimate2958.

Schädel, C. et al., 2016: Potential carbon emissions dominated by carbon
dioxide from thawed permafrost soils. Nat. Clim. Change, 6, 950-953,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3054.

Schaum, C.E. and $. Collins, 2014: Plasticity predicts evolution in a marine alga.
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B., 281(1793), 20141486, doi:10.1098/rspb.2014.1486.

Schlosberg, D. L.B. Collins and S. Niemeyer, 2017: Adaptation policy and
community discourse: Risk, vulnerability, and just transformation. Environ.
Politics, 26(3), 413-437, doi:10.1080/09644016.2017.1287628.

Schurer, A.P. et al, 2017: Importance of the pre-industrial baseline for
likelihood of exceeding Paris goals. Nat Clim. Change, 7(8), 563-567,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3345.

Seneviratne, S.IL.et al., 2012: Summary for Policymakers. In: Managing the Risks
of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation.
A Special Report of Working Groups 1 and Il of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F Stocker, D. Qin,
D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen,
M. Tignor and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 109-230.

Serpetti, N. et al, 2017: Impact of ocean warming on sustainable fisheries
management informs the ecosystem approach to fisheries. Sci Rep,
7113438), 15, doi:10.1038/541598-017-13220-7.
Framing and Context of the Report

Shadian, LM., 2014: The politics of Arctic sovereignty: oil ice, and Inuit
governance. Routledge.

Shaikh, F, Q. Ji and Y. Fan, 2015: The diagnosis of an electricity crisis and
alternative energy development in Pakistan. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 52,
1172-1185, doi:10.1016/j.rser.2015.08.009.

Shakhova, N. et al, 2013: Ebullition and storm-induced methane release
from the East Siberian Arctic Shelf. Nat Geosci, 7, 64-70, doi:10.1038/
ngeo2007.

Sharma, E. et al, 2019: Introduction. In: The Hindu Kush Himalaya
Assessment — Mountains, Climate Change Sustainability and People
[Wester, P. À. Mishra, A. Mukherji and A.B. Shrestha (eds.)]. SpringerNature,
Dordrecht. 627 pp. ISBN: 9783319950518.

Shepherd, J.G., P.G. Brewer, À. Oschlies and A.J. Watson, 2017: Ocean ventilation
and deoxygenation in a warming world: Introduction and overview. Phil
Trans. Roy. Soc., 375, 20170240, doi:10.1098/rsta.2017.0240.

Sherpa, P., 2014: Climate change, perceptions, and social heterogeneity in
Pharak, Mount Everest region of Nepal. Hum. Organ., 73(2), 153-161,
doi:10.17730/humo.73.2.94q43152111733t6.

Shi, J., VH.M. Visschers, M. Siegrist and J. Arvai, 2016: Knowledge as à driver
of public perceptions about climate change reassessed. Wat Clim. Change,
6(8), 759-762, doi:10.1038/nclimate2997.

Shi, J.-R., S.-P. Xie and L.D. Talley, 2018: Evolving relative importance of the
southern ocean and North Atlantic in anthropogenic ocean heat uptake. /
Clim., 31(18), 7459-7479, doi:10.1175/JCLI-D-18-0170.1.

Shindell, D. et al., 2012: Simultaneously mitigating near-term climate change
and improving human health and food security. Science, 335(6065), 183-
189, doi:10.1126/science.1210026.

Sigman, D. and E. Boyle, 2000: Glacial/interglacial variations in carbon
dioxide. Nature, 407, 859-869, doi:10.1038/35038000.

Sillitoe, P., 2007: Local science vs. global science: Approaches to indigenous
knowledge in international development. Studies in Environmental
Anthropology and Ethnobiology, Berghahn Books, New York, Oxford.
300 pp. ISBN: 9781845456481.

Singh, G.G. et al, 2018: A rapid assessment of co-benefits and trade-offs
among Sustainable Development Goals. Mar Policy, 93, 223-231,
doi:10.1016/j. marpol.2017.05.030.

Smith, E.K. and A. Mayer, 2019: Anomalous Anglophones? Contours of free
market ideology, political polarization, and climate change attitudes in
English-speaking countries, Western European and post-Communist states.
Clim. Change, 152(1), 17-34, doi:10.1007/s10584-018-2332-x.

Smith, KR. et al., 2014: Human health: impacts, adaptation, and co-benefits.
In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part
À: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group Il to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Field, C.B. VR. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea,
TE. Biller M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma,
ES. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, PR. Mastrandrea and L.L. White
(eds.}]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA, 709-754.

Smith, N. and A. Leiserowitz, 2014: The role of emotion in global warming
policy support and opposition. Risk Anal, 34(5), 937-948, doi:10.1111/
risa.12140.

Smith, ND. S.LF. Ndlovu and R.W. Summers, 2016: Milnerton Coast Legal
Review: Legal Issues Relevant to the City of Cape Town's Coastal Erosion
Management Strategy (for the portion of the Milnerton Coast that forms
the study area), Prepared for ERMD, City of Cape Town. ERMD, Cape Town.

Solecki, W., M. Pelling and M. Garschagen, 2017: Transitions between risk
management regimes in cities. Ecol Soc, 22(2), 38, doi:10.5751/ES-
09102-220238.

Solomon, $., G.-K. Plattner, R. Knutti and P. Friedlingstein, 2009: Irreversible
cimate change due to carbon dioxide emissions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A., 106(6), 1704-1709, doi:10.1073/pnas.081 2721106.

Chapter 1

Sommerkorn, M. and A.E. Nilsson, 2015: Governance of Arctic ecosystem
services. In: The Economics of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services TEEB
Scoping Study for the Arctic, ed. CAFF (Akureyri, Iceland: Conservation of
Arctic Flora and Fauna, 2015), ISBN: 9789935431462.

Sowman, M. D. Scott and C. Sutherland, 2016: Governance and Social Justice
Position Paper: Milnerton Beach, Prepared for ERMD, City of Cape Town.
ERMD, Cape Town.

Spratt, D. and I. Dunlop, 2018: What lies beneath: The understatement of
existential climate risk. Breakthrough-National Centre for Climate
Restoration, Melbourne, Australia, 40 pp.

Steffen, W. et al, 2018: Trajectories of the Earth System in the Anthropocene.
Proc. Nat. Acad Sci USA, 115(33), 8252-8259, doi:10.1073/
pnas.1810141115.

Steiner, C.E., 2015: A sea of warriors: Performing an identity of resilience
and empowerment in the face of climate change in the Pacific. The
Contemporary Pacific, 27(1), 147-180, doi:10.1353/cp.2015.0002.

Storto, À. et al, 2018: Extending an oceanographic variational scheme to
allow for affordable hybrid and four-dimensional data assimilation. Ocean
Model, 128, 67-86, doi:10.1016/j.ocemod.2018.06.005.

Stott, PA. et al., 2016: Attribution of extreme weather and climate-related
events. WiRes Clim. Change, 7(1), 23-41, doi:10.1002/wcc.380.

Strang, V., 2009: Integrating the social and natural sciences in environmental
research: À discussion paper. Environ. Dev Sustain., 11(1), 1-18,
doi:10.1007/510668-007-9095-2.

Stroeve, J.C. et al., 2017: Investigating the local-scale influence of sea ice on
Greenland surface melt. The Cryosphere, 11(5), 2363-2381, doi:10.5194/
tc-2017-65.

Sud, R., À. Mishra, N. Varma and S. Bhadwal, 2015: Adaptation policy and
practice in densely populated glacier-fed river basins of South Asia:
À systematic review. Reg. Environ. Change, 15 (5), 825-836, doi:10.1007/
s10113-014-0711-z.

Sunday, J.M. et al, 2014: Evolution in an acidifying ocean. 7rends Ecol. Evol.,
29(2), 117-125, doi:10.1016/j.tree.2013.11.001.

Sutton, R.T. 2018: Ideas: A simple proposal to improve the contribution of
IPCC WG1 to the assessment and communication of climate change risks.
Earth Syst. Dynam., 9, 1155-1158, doi:10.5194/esd-2018-36.

Szabo, S. et al, 2016: Making SDGs work for climate change hotspots.
Environment: Science Policy for Sustainable Development, 58 (6), 24-33,
doi:10.1080/00139157.2016.1209016.

Tagliabue, A. et al., 2017: The integral role of iron in ocean biogeochemistry.
Nature, 543(7643), 51-59, doi:10.1038/nature21058.

Talley, L.D., 2013: Closure of the global overturning circulation through
the Indian, Pacific, and Southern Oceans: Schematics and transports.
Oceanography, 26(1), 80-97, doi:10.5670/oceanog.2013.07.

Talley, L.D. et al., 2016: Changes in ocean heat, carbon content and ventilation:
A review of the first decade of GO-SHIP global repeat hydrography. Anne.
Rev. Mar Sci, 8(1),185-215, doi:10.1146/annurev-marine-052915-100829.

Tarnocai, C. et al, 2009: Soil organic carbon pools in the northern
drcumpolar permafrost region. Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 23(2), 1-11,
doi:10.1029/2008GB003327.

Tasmanian Climate Change Office, 2017: Tasmanian Wilderness and World
Heritage Area Bushfire and Climate Change Research Project: Tasmanian
Government's Response. Tasmanian Climate Change Office Department of
Premier and Cabinet, 49 pp. ISBN: 9780724656456.

Taylor, K.E., R.J. Stouffer and G.A. Meehl, 2012: An overview of CMIP5 and the
experiment design. Bull Am. Meteorol. Soc., 93(4), 485-498, doi:10.1175/
BAMS-D-11-00094.1.

Thaman, R. et al, 2013: The contribution of indigenous and local knowledge
systems to IPBES: Building synergies with science. IPBES Expert Meeting
Report, UNESCO/UNU, Paris, UNESCO, 49 pp.

Thomas, K. et al., 2019: Explaining differential vulnerability to climate change:
À social science review. WiRes Clim. Change, 10(2), 1-18, doi:10.1002/
wcc.565.

127

 
 

Chapter 1

Thomson, J.andW.E. Rogers, 2014: Swell and sea in the emergingArctic Ocean.
Geophys. Res. Letters, 41(9), 3136-3140, doi:10.1002/2014GL059983.
Thornton, BF et al., 2016: Methane fluxes from the sea to the atmosphere
across the Siberian shelf seas. Geophys. Res. Letters, 43(11), 5869-5877,

doi:10.1002/2016GL068977.

Tierney, K., 2015: Resilience and the neoliberal project: Discourses,
critiques, practices — and Katrina. Am. Behav. Sci, 59(10), 1327-1342,
doi:10.1177/0002764215591187.

Townhill, B. et al., 2017: Non-native marine species in north-west Europe:
Developing an approach to assess future spread using regional downscaled
climate projections. Aquat. Conserv, 27(5), 1035-1050, doi:10.1002/
aqc.2764.

Trenberth, K.E. JT. Fasullo and M.A. Balmaseda, 2014: Earth's Energy
Imbalance. { Clim., 27 (9), 3129-3144, doi:10.1175/ICLI-D-13-00294.1.
Trenberth, K.E., LT. Fasullo and T.G. Shepherd, 2015: Attribution of climate

extreme events. Wat. Clim. Change, 5, 725-730, doi:10.1038/nclimate2657.

Trenberth, K.E. et al, 2007: Estimates of the global water budget and its
annual cycle using observational and model data. { Hydrometeorol, 8,
758-769, doi:10.1175/1HM600.1.

Trusel, LD. et al, 2018: Nonlinear rise in Greenland runoff in response to
post-industrial Arctic warming. Nature, 564 (7734), 104-108, doi:10.1038/
s41586-018-0752-4.

Tschakert, P. et al., 2017: Climate change and loss, as if people mattered:
Values, places, and experiences. WiRes Clim. Change 8(5), e476,
doi:10.1002/wcc.476.

UN, 1992: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. FCCC
INFORMAL/84, United Nations, New York, 24.

UN, 2015a: Small Island Developing States in Numbers, Climate Change.
Edition 2015. United Nations, New York, [Available at: http://unohrlls.org/
small-island-developing-states-in-numbers-2015/1.

UN, 2015b: United Nations General Assembly. Transforming our world: The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. A/RES/70/1 [Available at:
www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/development-agenda/].

UNFCCC, 2015: The Paris Agreement. (FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1).

Unsworth, K.L. and K.S. Fielding, 2014: It's political: How the salience of one's
political identity changes climate change beliefs and policy support. Global
Environ. Change, 27, 131-137, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2014.05.002.

Uprety, K. and S.M. Salman, 2011: Legal aspects of sharing and management
of transboundary waters in South Asia: Preventing conflicts and promoting
cooperation. Hydrolog. Sci. J, 56(4), 641-661, doi:10.1080/02626667.20
11.576252.

van Oppen, M.JLH. JK. Oliver, H.M. Putnam and R.D. Gates, 2015: Building
coral reef resilience through assisted evolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.,
112,2307-2313, doi:10.1073/pnas.1422301112.

van Ruïjven, B.J et al., 2014: Enhancing the relevance of Shared Socioeconomic
Pathways for climate change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability research.
Clim. Change, 122(3), 481-494, doi:10.1007/s10584-013-0931-0.

van Valkengoed, A.M. and L. Steg, 2019: Meta-analyses of factors motivating
climate change adaptation behaviour. Nat. Clim. Change, 9 (2), 158-163,
doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0371-y.

van Vuuren, D.P. et al., 2011a: The representative concentration pathways: An
overview. Clim. Change, 109 (1-2), 5-31, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-0148-z.

van Vuuren, D.P. et al, 2011b: RCP2.6: exploring the possibility to keep
global mean temperature increase below 2°C. Clim. Change, 109, 95-116,
doi:10.1007/510584-011-0152-3.

Varma, N. et al, 2014: Climate change, disasters and development: Testing
the waters for adaptive governance in India. Vision: The Journal of Business
Perspective, 18(4), 327-338, doi:10.1177/0972262914551664.

Vaughan, D.G. et al., 2013: Observations: Cryosphere. In: Climate Change
2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group | to
the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change [Stocker, T.F, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,

128

Framing and Context of the Report

A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 317-382.

Vidas, D., 2000: Protecting the Polar marine environment: Law and policy
for pollution prevention. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom, 276 pp. ISBN: 0521663113.

Vidas, D. D. Freestone and J. McAdam, 2015: International law and sea level
rise: The new ILA committee. /£SA Journal of International & Comparative
Law, 21(2), 397-408.

Vierros, M., 2017: Communities and blue carbon: The role of traditional
management systems in providing benefits for carbon storage, biodiversity
conservation and livelihoods. Clim. Change, 140(1), 89-100, doi:10.1007/
s10584-013-0920-3.

Visbeck, M., 2018: Ocean science research is key for a sustainable future.
Nature Commun., 9(1), 690, doi:10.1038/541467-018-03158-3.

von Schuckmann, K. et al, 2016: An imperative to monitor Earth's energy
imbalance. Nat. Clim. Change, 6, 138-144, doi:10.1038/nclimate2876.

Walker, B., C.S. Holling, S. Carpenter and A. Kinzig, 2004: Resilience, adaptability
and transformability in social-ecological systems. Ecol Soc., 9(2), 5.

Walter, AM. 2014: Changing Gilgit-Baltistan: Perceptions of the recent
history and the role of community activism. Ethnoscripts, 16(1), 31-49.
Warner, LE, 2016: Of river linkage and issue linkage: Transboundary conflict

and cooperation on the River Meuse. Globalizations, 13(6), 741-766.

Warner, K. and K. van der Geest, 2013: Loss and damage from climate change:
Local-level evidence from nine vulnerable countries. /nt. { Global Warm.,
5(4), 367-386, doi:10.1504/1GW.2013.057289.

Watt-Cloutier, S., 2018: The right to be cold: One woman fight to protect the
Arctic and save the planet from climate change. University of Minnesota
Press, Minneapolis; London, 368 pp. ISBN: 9780670067107.

Weaver, C. et al, 2017: Reframing climate change assessments around risk:
Recommendations for the US National Climate Assessment. Environ. Res.
Letters, 12 (8), 080201, doi:10.1088/1748-9326/aa7494.

Weichselgartner, J. and I. Kelman, 2014: Geographies of resilience: Challenges
and opportunities of a descriptive concept. Prog. Hum. Geogr,, 39(3), 249-
267, doi:10.1177/0309132513518834.

West, 1.J. and G.K. Hovelsrud, 2010: Cross-scale adaptation challenges in the
coastal fisheries: Findings from Lebesby, Northern Norway. Arctic, 63(3),
338-354, doi:10.2307/20799601.

WGMS, 2017: Fuctuations of Glaciers Database. World Glacier Monitoring
Service, Zurich, Switzerland [Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.5904/
wgms-fog-2017-10].

Wise, R.M. et al, 2014: Reconceptualising adaptation to climate change as
part of pathways of change and response. Global Environ. Change, 28,
325-336, doi:10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.12.002.

WOA, 2016: The First Global Integrated Marine Assessment: Worid Ocean
Assessment 1. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom,
973 pp. ISBN: 9781108186148.

Wohling, M. 2009: The problem of scale in indigenous knowledge:
A perspective from northern Australia. Eco! Soc., 14(1), 1.

Wong, P.P etal., 2014: Coastal systems and low-lying areas. In: Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B. V.R. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Bilir M. Chatterji, K.L. Ebi,
YO. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Lewy, S. MacCracken,
PR. Mastrandrea and LL. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 361-409.

Wunsch, C., P. Heimbach, R. Ponte and I. Fukumori, 2009: The global
general circulation of the ocean estimated by the ECCO-Consortium.
Oceanography, 22(2), 88-103, doi:10.5670/oceanog.2009.41.

Wymann von Dach, S. et al, 2018: Leaving no one in mountains behind:
localizing the SDGs for resilience ofmountain people and ecosystems. Issue
Brief 2018: Sustainable Mountain Development Centre for Development
Framing and Context of the Report

and Environment and Mountain Research Initiative, with Bern Open
Publishing (BOP), Bern, Switzerland. 12 pp.

Xu, Y. and V. Ramanathan, 2017: Well below 2°C: Mitigation strategies for
avoiding dangerous to catastrophic climate changes. PNAS, 114(39),
10315-10323, doi:10.1073/pnas.1618481114.

YagerK. 2015:Satellite imagery and community perceptions of climate change
impacts and landscape change. In: Climate Cultures: Anthropological
Perspectives on Climate Change [Jessica, B. and M.R. Dove (eds.)]. Yale
University Press, New Haven, pp. 146-168. ISBN: 9780300198812.

Yeh, ET, 2016: How can experience of local residents be “knowledge”?
Challenges in interdisciplinary climate change research. Area, 48(1),
34-40, doi:10.1111/area.12189.

Young, OR. 2016: The shifting landscape of Arctic politics: Implications for
international cooperation. The Polar Journal, 6(2), 209-223, doi:10.1080/
2154896X.2016.1253823.

Yu, L. 2018: Global air-sea fluxes of heat, fresh water, and momentum:
Energy budget closure and unanswered questions. Annu. Rev. Mar Sci, 11,
227-248, doi:10.1146/annurev-marine-010816-060704.

Zheng, J. and $. Suh, 2019: Strategies to reduce the global carbon footprint of
plastics. Nat. Clim. Change, 9, 374-378, doi:10.1038/s41558-019-0459-z.

Zscheischler, L. et al, 2018: Future dimate risk from compound events. Nat.
Clim. Change, 8(6), 469-477, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0156-3.

Zuo, H., M.A. Balmaseda, K. Mogensen and S. Tietsche, 2018: OCEAN5: The
ECMWF Ocean Reanalysis System and its Real-Time analysis component.
ECMWF Tech Memo 823.

Chapter 1

129

 
