 

Sea Level Rise

and Implications for
Low-Lying Islands,
Coasts and Communities

Coordinating Lead Authors:
Michael Oppenheimer (USA), Bruce C. Glavovic (New Zealand/South Africa)

Lead Authors:

Jochen Hinkel (Germany), Roderik van de Wal (Netherlands), Alexandre K. Magnan (France),
Amro Abd-Elgawad (Egypt), Rongshuo Cai (China), Miguel Cifuentes-Jara (Costa Rica),
Robert M. DeConto (USA), Tuhin Ghosh (India), John Hay (Cook Islands), Federico Isla
(Argentina), Ben Marzeion (Germany), Benoit Meyssignac (France), Zita Sebesvari
(Hungary/Germany)

Contributing Authors:

Robbert Biesbroek (Netherlands), Maya K. Buchanan (USA), Ricardo Safra de Campos (UK),
Gonéri Le Cozannet (France), Catia Domingues (Australia), Sénke Dangendorf (Germany),
Petra Déll (Germany), Virginie K.E. Duvat (France), Tamsin Edwards (UK), Alexey Ekaykin
(Russian Federation), Donald Forbes (Canada), James Ford (UK), Miguel D. Fortes
(Philippines), Thomas Frederikse (Netherlands), Jean-Pierre Gattuso (France), Robert Kopp
(USA), Erwin Lambert (Netherlands), Judy Lawrence (New Zealand), Andrew Mackintosh
(New Zealand), Angélique Melet (France), Elizabeth McLeod (USA), Mark Merrifield (USA),
Siddharth Narayan (US), Robert J. Nicholls (UK), Fabrice Renaud (UK), Jonathan Simm (UK),
AJ Smit (South Africa), Catherine Sutherland (South Africa), Nguyen Minh Tu (Vietnam),
Jon Woodruff (USA), Poh Poh Wong (Singapore), Siyuan Xian (USA)

Review Editors:
Ayako Abe-Ouchi (Japan), Kapil Gupta (India), Joy Pereira (Malaysia)

Chapter Scientist:
Maya K. Buchanan (USA)

This chapter should be cited as:

Oppenheimer, ., B.C. Glavovic, J. Hinkel, R. van de Wal, A.K. Magnan, A. Abd-Elgawad, R. Cai, M. Cifuentes-Jara, R.M.
DeConto, T. Ghosh, J. Hay, F. Isla, B. Marzeion, B. Meyssignac, and Z. Sebesvari, 2019: Sea Level Rise and Implications
for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities. In: /PCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing
Climate [H.-O. Portner, D.C. Roberts, V. Masson-Delmotte, P. Zhai, M. Tignor, E. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegria,
M. Nicolai, A. Okem, J. Petzold, B. Rama, N.M. Weyer (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New
York, NY, USA, pp. 321-445. https://doiorg/10.1017/9781009157964.006.

321
 

Chapter 4

Table of contents

EX@CUtiVe SUMMAPY ooo sssnssnssnntsnensnetinenennnenein

AV Synthesis cc nnensnennsennsnmenanntananesamesnaie
4.1.1 Purpose, Scope, and Structure
Of this Chapter. ccccccssssnnnssnnnnnssnstnnnne

Future Sea level Rise and Implications
FOr RESPONSES ooo ccecsssnssnntnnssnnintnsnntnnenennesee

Sea Level Rise Impacts and Implications
FOr RESPONSES ooo ccecsssnssnntnnssnnintnsnntnnenennesee

Response Options, Governance Challenges
ANd Ways Forward oo cccnsnsssnsnenenaneus

4.2 Physical Basis for Sea Level Change

and Associated Hazards 200000000
4.2.1 Processes of Sea Level Change 0...
4.2.2 Observed Changes in Sea Level

(Past and Present) oo. cccccscsssssssssessessssesiesteesiesee
4.2.3 Projections of Sea Level Change 0...
Box 4.1: Case Studies of Coastal Hazard
AND RESPONSE oc ssnnnnsstntntnnnntntnnnntnenneeues

4.3 Exposure, Vulnerability, Impacts

and Risk Related to Sea Level Rise
43.1 INtrOMU ction on esnsnnessmnnnenennnennsennsnannnases
4.3.2 Dimensions of Exposure and Vulnerability

to Sea Level RiS@ oo ccsmsnsnnmennenennaeiua
Box 4.2: Methodological Advances
in Exposure and Vulnerability Assessments .............
4.3.3 Observed Impacts, and Current

and Future Risk of Sea Level Ris@ oe
4.3.4 Conclusion on Coastal Risk:

Reasons for Concern and Future Risks

322

 

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

4.4 Responding to Sea Level Rise 385
A401 INtrOMUctiON ee eenesenensenenanutanenanenesesnaies 385
Box 4.3: Responses to Sea Level Rise... 385

4.4.2 Observed and Projected Responses,
their Costs, Benefits, Co-benefits,

Drawbacks, Efficiency and Governance .............. 386
4.4.3 Governance Challenges in Responding

to Sea Level Ris@ oo cssnmtnninseninnennennennn 398
4.4.4 Planning, Engagement and Decision Tools

for Choosing Responses oc ccccsesnsseneenen 400
Box 4.4: Community Based Experiences:
Canadian Arctic and Hawkes Bay, New Zealand ..... 406
4.4.5 Enabling Conditions and Lessons

Learned From ‘Practice’

 

4.4.6 Towards Climate Resilient
Development Pathways ou... cccssssenenenen 410
References cc cccssnsstnnnstnsntustetsetnstnsetnieennstneteteee 412
Frequently Asked Questions... cnennensmenn 411

FAQ 4.1 What challenges does the
inevitability of sea level rise present
to coastal communities and how
can communities adapt? .0 411
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Executive Summary

This chapter assesses past and future contributions to global, regional
and extreme sea level changes, associated risk to low-lying islands,
coasts, cities, and settlements, and response options and pathways to
resilience and sustainable development along the coast.

Observations

Global mean sea level (GMSL) is rising (virtually certain’)
and accelerating (high confidence’). The sum of glacier and
ice sheet contributions is now the dominant source of GMSL
rise (very high confidence). GMSL from tide gauges and altimetry
observations increased from 1.4 mm yr over the period 1901-1990
to 2.1 mm yr’ over the period 1970-2015 to 3.2 mm yr over
the period 1993-2015 to 3.6 mm yr” over the period 2006-2015
(high confidence). The dominant cause of GMSL rise since 1970 is
anthropogenic forcing (high confidence). {4.2.2.1.1, 4.2.2.2}

GMSL was considerably higher than today during past climate
states that were warmer than pre-industrial, including the
Last Interglacial (LIG; 129-116 ka), when global mean surface
temperature was 0.5°C-1.0°C warmer, and the mid-Pliocene
Warm Period (mPWP; ~3.3 to 3.0 million years ago), 2°C—4°C
warmer. Despite the modest global warmth of the Last
Interglacial, GMSL was /ikely 6-9 m higher, mainly due to
contributions from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets
(GIS and AIS, respectively), and unfikely more than 10m higher
(medium confidence). Based on new understanding about
geological constraints since the IPCC 5th Assessment Report
(AR5), 25 mis a plausible upper bound on GMSL during the
mPWP (/ow confidence). Ongoing uncertainties in palaeo sea level
reconstructions and modelling hamper conclusions regarding the
total magnitudes and rates of past sea level rise (SLR). Furthermore,
the long (multi-millennial) time scales of these past climate and
sea level changes, and regional climate influences from changes in
Earth’s orbital configuration and climate system feedbacks, lead to
low confidence in direct comparisons with near-term future changes.
{Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1, 4.2.2, 4.2.2.1, 4.2.2.5, SM 4.1}

Non-climatic anthropogenic drivers, including recent
and historical demographic and settlement trends and
anthropogenic subsidence, have played an important role
in increasing low-lying coastal communities’ exposure and
vulnerability to SLR and extreme sea level (ESL) events (very
high confidence). \n coastal deltas, for example, these drivers have
altered freshwater and sediment availability (high confidence). In

 

Chapter 4

low-lying coastal areas more broadly, human-induced changes can
be rapid and modify coastlines over short periods of time, outpacing
the effects of SLR (high confidence). Adaptation can be undertaken in
the short- to medium-term by targeting local drivers of exposure and
vulnerability, notwithstanding uncertainty about local SLR impacts
in coming decades and beyond (high confidence). {4.2.2.4, 4.3.1,
4.3.2.2, 4.3.2.3}

Coastal ecosystems are already impacted by the combination
of SLR, other climate-related ocean changes, and adverse
effects from human activities on ocean and land (high
confidence). Attributing such impacts to SLR, however, remains
challenging due to the influence of other climate-related and
non-climatic drivers such as infrastructure development and
human-induced habitat degradation (high confidence). Coastal
ecosystems, including saltmarshes, mangroves, vegetated dunes and
sandy beaches, can build vertically and expand laterally in response
to SLR, though this capacity varies across sites (high confidence).
These ecosystems provide important services that include coastal
protection and habitat for diverse biota. However, as a consequence
of human actions that fragment wetland habitats and restrict
landward migration, coastal ecosystems progressively lose their
ability to adapt to climate-induced changes and provide ecosystem
services, including acting as protective barriers (high confidence).
{4.3.2.3}

Coastal risk is dynamic and increased by widely observed
changes in coastal infrastructure, community livelihoods,
agriculture and habitability (high confidence). As with coastal
ecosystems, attribution of observed changes and associated
risk to SLR remains challenging. Drivers and processes inhibiting
attribution include demographic, resource and land use changes and
anthropogenic subsidence. {4.3.3, 4.3.4}

A diversity of adaptation responses to coastal impacts
and risks have been implemented around the world, but
mostly as a reaction to current coastal risk or experienced
disasters (high confidence). Hard coastal protection measures
(dikes, embankments, sea walls and surge barriers) are widespread,
providing predictable levels of safety in northwest Europe, East
Asia, and around many coastal cities and deltas. Ecosystem-based
adaptation (EbA) is continuing to gain traction worldwide, providing
multiple co-benefits, but there is still ow agreement on its cost and
long-term effectiveness. Advance, which refers to the creation of
new land by building into the sea (e.g., land reclamation), has a long
history in most areas where there are dense coastal populations.
Accommodation measures, such as early warning systems (EWS) for
ESL events, are widespread. Retreat is observed but largely restricted

Each finding is grounded in an evaluation of underlying evidence and agreement. A level of confidence is expressed using five qualifiers: very low, low, medium, high and

very high, and typeset in italics, e.g., medium confidence. The following terms have been used to indicate the assessed likelihood of an outcome or a result: virtually certain
99-100% probability, very likely 90-100%, likely 66—100%, about as likely as not 33-66%, unlikely 0-33%, very unlikely 0-10%, exceptionally unlikely 0-1%. Assessed
likelinood is typeset in italics, ¢.g., very likely. This is consistent with ARS and the other AR6 Special Reports. Additional terms (extremely likely 95—-100%, more likely than
not >50-100%, more unlikely than likely O-<50%, extremely unlikely 0-5%) are used when appropriate. This Report also uses the term ‘//kely range’ or ‘very likely range’
to indicate that the assessed likelihood of an outcome lies within the 17-83% or 5-95% probability range. For more details see {1.9.2, Figure 1.4}.

Statements about uncertainty in Section 4.2 are contingent upon the RCP or other emissions assumptions that accompany them. In Section 4.4, the entirety of information

facing a decision maker is taken into consideration, including the unknown path of future emissions, in assessing uncertainty. Depending on which perspective is chosen,

uncertainty may or may not be characterised as ‘deep’.

323

 
 

Chapter 4

to small communities or carried out for the purpose of creating new
wetland habitat. {4.4.2.3, 4.4.2.4, 4.4.2.5}

Projections

Future rise in GMSL caused by thermal expansion, melting
of glaciers and ice sheets and land water storage changes, is
strongly dependent on which Representative Concentration
Pathway (RCP) emission scenario is followed. SLR at the end
of the century is projected to be faster under all scenarios,
including those compatible with achieving the long-term
temperature goal set out in the Paris Agreement. GMSL will
rise between 0.43 m (0.29-0.59 m, likely range; RCP2.6) and
0.84 m (0.61-1.10 m, fikely range; RCP8.5) by 2100 (medium
confidence) relative to 1986-2005. Beyond 2100, sea level will
continue to rise for centuries due to continuing deep ocean heat
uptake and mass loss of the GIS and AIS and will remain elevated
for thousands of years (high confidence). Under RCP8.5, estimates
for 2100 are higher and the uncertainty range larger than in ARS.
Antarctica could contribute up to 28 cm of SLR (RCP8.5, upper end of
likely range) by the end of the century (medium confidence). Estimates
of SLR higher than the /ikefy range are also provided here for decision
makers with low risk tolerance. {SR1.5, 4.1, 4.2.3.2, 4.2.3.5}

Under RCP8.5, the rate of SLR will be 15 mm yr (10-20 mmyr“|,
likely range) in 2100, and could exceed several cm yr" in the
22nd century. These high rates challenge the implementation of
adaptation measures that involve a long lead time, but this has not
yet been studied in detail. {4.2.3.2, 4.4.2.2.3}

Processes controlling the timing of future ice shelf loss and
the spatial extent of ice sheet instabilities could increase
Antarctica’s contribution to SLR to values higher than
the fikely range on century and longer time scales (fow
confidence). Evolution of the AIS beyond the end of the 21st century
is characterized by deep uncertainty as ice sheet models lack realistic
representations of some of the underlying physical processes. The
few model studies available addressing time scales of centuries to
millennia indicate multi-metre (2.3-5.4 m) rise in sea level for RCP8.5
(low confidence). There is low confidence in threshold temperatures
for ice sheet instabilities and the rates of GMSL rise they can produce.
{Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1, Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3,
and Sections 4.1, 4.2.3.1.1, 4.2.3.1.2, 4.2.3.6}

Sea level rise is not globally uniform and varies regionally.
Thermal expansion, ocean dynamics and land ice loss
contributions will generate regional departures of about +30%
around the GMSL rise. Differences from the global mean can be
greater than +30% in areas of rapid vertical land movements,
including those caused by local anthropogenic factors such as
groundwater extraction (high confidence). Subsidence caused by
human activities is currently the most important cause of relative sea
level rise (RSL) change in many delta regions. While the comparative
importance of climate-driven RSL rise will increase over time, these
findings on anthropogenic subsidence imply that a consideration of

324

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

local processes is critical for projections of sea level impacts at local
scales (high confidence). {4.2.1.6, 4.2.2.4}

Due to projected GMSL rise, ESLs that are historically rare (for
example, today’s hundred-year event) will become common
by 2100 under all RCPs (high confidence). Many low-lying cities
and small islands at most latitudes will experience such events
annually by 2050. Greenhouse gas (GHG) mitigation envisioned in
low-emission scenarios (e.g., RCP2.6) is expected to sharply reduce
but not eliminate risk to low-lying coasts and islands from SLR and
ESL events. Low-emission scenarios lead to slower rates of SLR
and allow for a wider range of adaptation options. For the first half
of the 21st century differences in ESL events among the scenarios are
small, facilitating adaptation planning. {4.2.2.5, 4.2.3.4}

Non-climatic anthropogenic drivers will continue to increase
the exposure and vulnerability of coastal communities to future
SLR and ESL events in the absence of major adaptation efforts
compared to today (high confidence). {4.3.4, Cross-Chapter Box 9}

The expected impacts of SLR on coastal ecosystems over
the course of the century include habitat contraction, loss
of functionality and biodiversity, and lateral and inland
migration. Impacts will be exacerbated in cases of land
reclamation and where anthropogenic barriers prevent inland
migration of marshes and mangroves and limit the availability
and relocation of sediment (high confidence). Under favourable
conditions, marshes and mangroves have been found to keep pace
with fast rates of SLR (e.g., >10 mm yr), but this capacity varies
significantly depending on factors such as wave exposure of the
location, tidal range, sediment trapping, overall sediment availability
and coastal squeeze (high confidence). {4.3.3.5.1}

In the absence of adaptation, more intense and frequent ESL
events, together with trends in coastal development will
increase expected annual flood damages by 2-3 orders of
magnitude by 2100 (high confidence). However, well designed
coastal protection is very effective in reducing expected
damages and cost efficient for urban and densely populated
regions, but generally unaffordable for rural and poorer areas
(high confidence). Effective protection requires investments on the
order of tens to several hundreds of billions of USD yr globally (high
contidence).While investments are generally cost efficient for densely
populated and urban areas (high confidence), rural and poorer areas
will be challenged to afford such investments with relative annual
costs for some small island states amounting to several percent of
GDP (high confidence). Even with well-designed hard protection, the
tisk of possibly disastrous consequences in the event of failure of
defences remains. {4.3.4, 4.4.2.2, 4.4.3.2, Cross-Chapter Box 9}

Risk related to SLR (including erosion, flooding and
salinisation) is expected to significantly increase by the end of
this century along all low-lying coasts in the absence of major
additional adaptation efforts (very high confidence). While
only urban atoll islands and some Arctic communities are expected
to experience moderate to high risk relative to today in a low
emission pathway, almost high to very high risks are expected in all
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

low-lying coastal settings at the upper end of the /ikely range for high
emission pathways (medium confidence). However, the transition
from moderate to high and from high to very high risk will vary from
one coastal setting to another (high confidence). While a slower
rate of SLR enables greater opportunities for adapting, adaptation
benefits are also expected to vary between coastal settings. Although
ambitious adaptation will not necessarily eradicate end-century SLR
tisk (medium confidence), it will help to buy time in many locations
and therefore help to lay a robust foundation for adaptation beyond
2100. {4.1.3, 4.3.4, Box 4.1, SM4.2}

Choosing and Implementing Responses

All types of responses to SLR, including protection,
accommodation, EbA, advance and retreat, have important
and synergistic roles to play in an integrated and sequenced
response to SLR (high confidence). Hard protection and advance
(building into the sea) are economically efficient in most urban
contexts facing land scarcity (high confidence), but can lead to
increased exposure in the long term. Where sufficient space is
available, EbA can both reduce coastal risks and provide multiple
other benefits (medium confidence). Accommodation such as flood
proofing buildings and EWS for ESL events are often both low-cost and
highly cost-efficient in all contexts (high confidence). Where coastal
risks are already high, and population size and density are low, or in
the aftermath of a coastal disaster, retreat may be especially effective,
albeit socially, culturally and politically challenging. {4.4.2.2, 4.4.2.3,
4.4.2.4, 4.4.2.5, 4.4.2.6, 4.4.3}

Technical limits to hard protection are expected to be reached
under high emission scenarios (RCP8.5) beyond 2100 (high
confidence) and biophysical limits to EbA may arise during
the 21st century, but economic and social barriers arise well
before the end of the century (medium confidence). Economic
challenges to hard protection increase with higher sea levels and will
make adaptation unaffordable before technical limits are reached
(high confidence). Drivers other than SLR are expected to contribute
more to biophysical limits of EbA. For corals, limits may be reached
during this century, due to ocean acidification and ocean warming,
and for tidal wetlands due to pollution and infrastructure limiting
their inland migration. Limits to accommodation are expected to occur
well before limits to protection occur. Limits to retreat are uncertain,
reflecting research gaps. Social barriers (including governance
challenges) to adaptation are already encountered. {4.4.2.2, 4.4.2.3.,
4.4.2.3.2, 4.4.2.5, 4.4.2.6, 4.4.3, Cross-Chapter Box 9}

Choosing and implementing responses to SLR presents society
with profound governance challenges and difficult social choices,
which are inherently political and value laden (high confidence).
The large uncertainties about post 2050 SLR, and the substantial
impact expected, challenge established planning and decision
making practises and introduce the need for coordination within and
between governance levels and policy domains. SLR responses also
raise equity concerns about marginalising those most vulnerable and
could potentially spark or compound social conflict (high confidence).
Choosing and implementing responses is further challenged through a

Chapter 4

lack of resources, vexing trade-offs between safety, conservation and
economic development, multiple ways of framing the ‘sea level rise
problem’, power relations, and various coastal stakeholders having
conflicting interests in the future development of heavily used coastal
zones (high confidence). {4.4.2, 4.4.3}

Despite the large uncertainties about post 2050 SLR,
adaptation decisions can be made now, facilitated by using
decision analysis methods specifically designed to address
uncertainty (high confidence). These methods favour flexible
responses (i.e., those that can be adapted over time) and periodically
adjusted decisions (i.e, adaptive decision making). They use
robustness criteria (i.e., effectiveness across a range of circumstances)
for evaluating alternative responses instead of standard expected
utility criteria (high confidence). One example is adaptation pathway
analysis, which has emerged as a low-cost tool to assess long-term
coastal responses as sequences of adaptive decisions in the face of
dynamic coastal risk characterised by deep uncertainty (medium
evidence, high agreement). The range of SLR to be considered
in decisions depends on the risk tolerance of stakeholders, with
stakeholders whose risk tolerance is low also considering SLR higher
than the fikely range. {4.1, 4.4.4.3}

Adaptation experience to date demonstrates that using a
locally appropriate combination of decision analysis, land
use planning, public participation and conflict resolution
approaches can help to address the governance challenges
faced in responding to SLR (high confidence). Effective SLR
responses depend, first, on taking a long-term perspective when
making short-term decisions, explicitly accounting for uncertainty of
locality-specific risks beyond 2050 (high confidence), and building
governance capabilities to tackle the complexity of SLR risk (medium
evidence, high agreement). Second, improved coordination of SLR
responses across scales, sectors and policy domains can help to
address SLR impacts and risk (high confidence). Third, prioritising
consideration of social vulnerability and equity underpins efforts to
promote fair and just climate resilience and sustainable development
(high confidence) and can be helped by creating safe community
arenas for meaningful public deliberation and conflict resolution
(medium evidence, high agreement). Finally, public awareness and
understanding about SLR risks and responses can be improved by
drawing on local, indigenous and scientific knowledge systems,
together with social learning about locality-specific SLR risk and
response potential (high confidence). {4.4.4.2, 4.4.5, Table 4.9}

Achieving the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) and charting Climate Resilient Development Pathways
depends in part on ambitious and sustained mitigation
efforts to contain SLR coupled with effective adaptation
actions to reduce SLR impacts and risk (medium evidence,
high agreement).

325

 
 

Chapter 4

4.1 Synthesis

4.1.1 Purpose, Scope, and Structure of this Chapter
This chapter assesses the literature published since the AR5 on
past and future contributions to global, regional and ESL changes,
associated risk to low-lying islands, coasts, cities and settlements,
and response options and pathways to resilience and sustainable
development along the coast. The chapter follows the risk framework
of ARS, in which risk is assessed in terms of hazard, exposure and
vulnerability (Cross-Chapter Box 1 Chapter 1; Box 4.1), and is
structured as follows (Figure 4.1):

e Section 4.1 (this section) presents a high-level synthesis of our
assessment and provides entry points to more specific content
found in the other sections.

e Section 4.2 assesses the current understanding of processes
contributing to mean and extreme SLR globally, regionally
and locally, with an emphasis on new insights about the AIS
contribution.

e Section 4.3 assesses how mean and extreme sea level changes
translate into coastal hazards (e.g., flooding, erosion and salinity
intrusion), how these interact with socioeconomic drivers of
coastal exposure and vulnerability, and how this interaction
translates into observed impacts and projected risks for
ecosystems, natural resources and human systems.

e Section 4.4 assesses the cost, effectiveness, co-benefits, efficiency,
and technical limits of different types of SLR responses and
identifies governance challenges (also called barriers) associated

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

with choosing and implementing responses. Next, planning,
public participation, conflict resolution and decision analysis
methods for addressing the identified governance challenges are
assessed, as well as practical lessons learned in local cases.

4.1.2 Future Sea level Rise and Implications

for Responses

For understanding responses to climate-change induced SLR, two
aspects of sea level are important to note initially:

1. Climate-change induced GMSLrise is caused by thermal expansion
of ocean water and ocean mass gain, the latter primarily due to a
decrease in land-ice mass. However, responses to SLR are local and
hence always based on RSL experienced at a particular location.
GMSL is modified regionally by climate processes and locally by
a variety of factors, some driven or influenced by human activity.
Of particular relevance for responding to SLR is anthropogenic
subsidence, which can lead to rates of RSL rise that exceed those
of climate-induced SLR by an order of magnitude, specifically in
delta regions and near cities (4.2.2.4). In these subsiding regions,
one available response to prepare for future climate-induced SLR
is to manage and reduce anthropogenic subsidence (4.4.2).

2. The combination of gradual change of mean sea level with
ESL events such as tides, surges and waves causes coastal
impacts (4.2.3). ESL events at the coast that are rare today
will become more frequent in the future, which means that for
many locations, the main starting point for coastal planning

{Section 4.2} {Section 4.3} {Section 4.4}
Global Dimensions of exposure and Responses
+ Ice sheets vulnerability to sea level rise + Protection
+ Glaciers + Environmental dimensions + Acommodatation

* Thermal expansion
+ Land water storage

Climate
change
Relative sea + People
level change
+ Mean sea level
+ Extreme sea level
events
Other
drivers

Local / Regional
+ Subsidence

* Human dimensions

+ The built environment
* Human activities

Coastal hazards
+ Permanent submergence
+ Coastal flooding
+ Coastal erosion
+ Loss and change of coastal

+ Retreat
+ Advance
+ Ecosystem-based adaptation

Impacts on and risk to:
+ Land and land uses

* Ecosystem services

Practices and tools for
enabling social choices

+ Planning

+ Public participation
* Conflict resolution
+ Decision analysis
+ Enablers

+ Lessons learned

Governance challenges
+ Time horizon and uncertainty

0 : See ae . + Cross-scale and cross-domain
+ Ocean dynamics + Salinization of soils, ground and aa
* Climate variability surface water

+ Geodynamics

+ Impeded drainage

+ Equity and social vulnerability
+ Social conflict
+ Complexity

‘ Adaptation )

Figure 4.1 | Schematic illustration of the interconnection of Chapter 4 themes, including drivers of sea level rise (SLR) and (extreme) sea level hazards (Section 4.2),
exposure, vulnerability, impacts and risk related to SLR (Section 4.3), and responses, associated governance challenges and practises and tools for enabling social choices

and addressing governance challenges (Section 4.4).

326
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

and decision making is information on current and future ESL
events. One important response for preparing for future SLR is
to improve observational systems (tide gauges, wave buoys and
remote sensing techniques), because in many places around the
world current frequencies and intensities of ESL events are not
well understood due to a lack of observational data (4.2.3.4.1).

After an increase of sea level from 1-2 mm yr in most regions over
the past century, rates of 3-4 mm yr are now being experienced that
will further increase to 4-9 mm yr under RCP2.6 and 10-20 mm yr!
at the end of the century under RCP8.5. Nevertheless, up to 2050,
uncertainty in climate change-driven future sea level is relatively
small, which provides a robust basis for short-term (£30 years)
adaptation planning. GMSL will rise between 0.24 m (0.17-0.32 m,
likely range) under RCP2.6 and 0.32 m (0.23-0.40 m, likely range)
under RCP8.5 (medium confidence; 4.2.3). The combined effect of
mean and extreme sea levels results in events which are rare in the
historical context (return period of 100 years or larger; probability
<0.01 yr) occurring yearly at some locations by the middle of this
century under all emission scenarios (4.2.3.4.1; high confidence). This
includes, for instance, those parts of the intertropical low-lying coasts
that are currently exposed to storm surges only infrequently. Hence,
additional adaptation is needed irrespective of the uncertainties in
future global GHG emissions and the Antarctic contribution to SLR.

Beyond 2050, uncertainty in climate change induced SLR increases
substantially due to uncertainties in emission scenarios and the
associated climate changes, and the response of the AIS in a warmer
world. Combining process-model based studies in which there is medium
confidence, it is found that GMSL is projected to rise between 0.43 m
(0.29-0.59 m, likely range) under RCP 2.6 and 0.84 m (0.61-1.10 m,

Chapter 4

likely range) under RCP 8.5 by 2100 (Figure 4.3). The range that needs
to be considered for planning and implementing coastal responses
depends on the risk tolerance of stakeholders (ie, those deciding
and those affected by a decision; 4.4.4.3.2). Stakeholders that are risk
tolerant (e.g., those planning for investments that can be very easily
adapted to unforeseen conditions) may prefer to use the /ikely ranges
of RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 for long-term adaptation planning. Stakeholders
with a low risk tolerance (e.g., those planning for coastal safety in cities
and long term investment in critical infrastructure) may also consider
SLR above this range, because there is a 17% chance that GMSL
will exceed 0.59 m under RCP2.6 and 1.10 m under RCP8.5 in 2100.
Process-model based studies cannot yet provide this information, but
expert elicitation studies show that a GMSL of 2 m in 2100 cannot be
ruled out (4.2.3).

Despite the large uncertainty in late 21st century SLR, progress in
adaptation planning and implementation is feasible today and may be
economically beneficial. Many coastal decisions with time horizons of
decades to over a century are made today (e.g., critical infrastructure,
coastal protection works, city planning, etc.) and accounting for
relative SLR can improve these decisions. Decision-analysis methods
specifically targeting situations of large uncertainty are available and,
combined with suitable planning, public participation and conflict
resolution processes, can improve outcomes (high confidence; 4.4.4.2,
4.4.4.3). For example, adaptation pathway analysis recognises and
enables sequenced long-term decision making in the face of dynamic
coastal risk characterised by deep uncertainty (medium evidence, high
agreement; 4.4.4.3.4). The use of these decision-analysis tools can
be integrated into statutory land use or spatial planning provisions
to formalise these decisions and enable effective implementation by
relevant governing authorities (4.4.4.2).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6
B19
54 " RCP2.6 ypadsicae B19
Global mean 16; RCP8.5 |
sea level (m) -_
44 0.54 i prob Ib
| a HTT =
2000 2050 2100 ea
24 WT
i asf THTIIT
ccm sea a eR TS
" 2000 2050 2100 2150 2200 2950 2300
Year

Figure 4.2 | Projected sea level rise (SLR) until 2300. The inset shows an assessment of the /ikely range of the projections for RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 up to 2100 (medium
confidence). Projections for longer time scales are highly uncertain but a range is provided (4.2.3.6; /ow confidence). For context, results are shown from other estimation
approaches in 2100 and 2300. The two sets of two bars labelled B19 are from an expert elicitation for the Antarctic component (Bamber et al, 2019), and reflect the
likely range for a 2°C and 5°C temperature warming (low confidence; details section 4.2.3.3.1). The bar labelled “prob.” indicates the /ikely range of a set of probabilistic
projections (4.2.3.2). The arrow indicated by 518 shows the result of an extensive sensitivity experiment with a numerical model for the Antarctic Ice Sheet (AIS) combined,
like the results from B19 and “prob.”, with results from Church et al (2013) for the other components of SLR. $18 also shows the fikely range.

327

 
 

Chapter 4

Beyond 2100, sea level will continue to rise for centuries and will
remain elevated for thousands of years (high confidence; 4.2.3.5).
Only a few modelling studies are available for SLR beyond 2100.
However, all studies agree that the difference in GMSL between
RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 increases substantially on multi-centennial and
millennial time scales (very high confidence). On a millennial time
scale, this difference is about 10 metres in some model simulations,
whereas it is only several decimetres at the end of 21st century.
The larger the emissions the larger the risks associated with SLR as
already assessed in SR1.5. Under RCP8.5 the few available studies
indicate a fikely range of 2.3-5.4 m (low confidence) in 2300. With
strong mitigation efforts (RCP2.6), SLR will be kept to a /ikely range
of 0.6-1.1 m (Figure 4.2). Regardless, ambitious and sustained
adaptation efforts are needed to reduce risks.

4.1.3 Sea Level Rise Impacts and Implications

for Responses

Rising mean and increasingly extreme sea level threaten coastal
zones through a range of coastal hazards including (i) the permanent
submergence of land by higher mean sea levels or mean high tides;
(ii) more frequent or intense coastal flooding; (iii) enhanced coastal
erosion; (iv) loss and change of coastal ecosystems; (v) salinisation
of soils, ground and surface water; and (vi) impeded drainage.
At the century scale and without adaptation, the vast majority
of low-lying islands, coasts and communities face substantial
tisk from these coastal hazards, whether they are urban or rural,
continental or island, at any latitude, and irrespective of their level

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

of development (Section 4.3.4; Figure 4.3; high confidence). In the
absence of an ambitious increase in adaptation efforts compared
to those currently underway, high to very high risks are expected
in many coastal geographies at the upper end of the RCP8.5 /ikely
range. These include resource-rich coastal cities, urban atoll islands,
densely populated deltas, and Arctic communities (Chapter 4 Box 4;
Figure 4.3 and Section 4.3.4). At the same time coastal protection
is very effective and cost-efficient for cities but not for less densely
populated rural areas. Some geographies, such as urban atoll
islands and Arctic communities face moderate to high risk even
under RCP2.6 (medium confidence).

In many places, however, non SLR-related, local environmental and
human dimensions of exposure and vulnerability play a critical
role in increasing exposure and vulnerability to coastal hazards
(Section 4.3.2.5). For example, the ability of morphological and
ecological systems (Sections 4.3.3.3 and 4.3.3.5) to protect human
settlements and infrastructure by attenuating ESL events and
stabilising shorelines is progressively being lost due to coastal squeeze,
pollution, habitat degradation and fragmentation (Section 4.3.3.5.4;
high confidence). Hence, an important near term response to RSL rise
is to reduce these adverse environmental and human dimensions
of exposure and vulnerability. In addition, the drivers of exposure
and vulnerability vary across different coastal contexts ranging
from resource-rich cities to small islands (Sections 4.3.3, 4.3.4).
Accordingly, effective responses need to be context-specific, and
address the locality-specific drivers of risk.

 

 

 

 

Global mean Relative Scenarios
sea level rise . sea level rise Risk to coastal geographies at end of century
-——— elative to present day —------—-—-—-—-} No-to-moderate response
Maximum potential response
Observations RCP2.6 ROP8.5 i
i Level of additional risk
4 due to sea level rise
~110 cm/ RCP8.5 (Upper likely range) "
Very high
~B4 om/RCPB.5 (Medien) ory nig
High
~43 om /RCP2.6 (Median)
Moderate
Undetectable
0.cm/ present day
T T T T
1900 1950 2000 2050 2100 Resource-rich Urban atoll Large tropical Arctic I [En of sea level
coastal cities islands agricultural deltas communities across case studies

Present day = 1986-2005; End of century = 2081-2100

Figure 4.3 | Additional risk related to sea level rise (SLR) for low-lying coastal areas by the end of the 21st century. Section 4.3.4 provides a synthesis of the assessment
methodology and the findings, while $M4.3 provides details. Left-hand panel describes global mean sea level (GMSL) rise observations for the Present-Day (1986-2005)
and projections under RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 by 2100 relative to the Present-Day according to advances in this chapter. Relative sea level (RSL) changes at specific locations
are represented by the coloured blocs (range of the real-world case studies used) and coloured dotted lines (mean) at the background of the middle panel, which describes
risk to illustrative geographies as assessed in this chapter. Each illustrative geography is supported by real-world case studies described in the literature (Box 4.1, 4.3.4.1
and Table SM4.2.5): three for resource-rich coastal cities, three for urban atoll islands, two for large tropical agricultural deltas, five for Arctic communities. N.B. (1): Only
Arctic communities remote from regions of rapid glacial-isostatic adjustment have been selected for this assessment. N.B (2): according to the specific scope of the chapter,
this assessment focuses on the additional risks due to SLR and does not account for changes in extreme event climatology (Sections 4.2.3.4.1 to 4.2.3.4.3, 6.3.1.1 to
6.3.1.3), which in some cases would imply a different level of risk than assessed here. The middle panel also distinguishes between two adaptation scenarios. (A) ‘No-to-
moderate response’ represents a business-as-usual scenario where no major additional adaptation efforts compared to today’s level of effort are implemented (ie., neither
further significant intensification of action nor new types of actions). (B) ‘Maximum potential response’ represents the opposite situation, that is, an ambitious combination
of both incremental and transformational adaptation that leads to significant additional efforts compared to today and to (A). Here, the authors assume adaptation
implemented at its full potential, that is, the extent of adaptation that is technologically possible, with minimal financial, social and political barriers.

328
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

4.1.4 Response Options, Governance Challenges

and Ways Forward

Responding to SLR refers to reducing hazards, exposure and
vulnerability of low-lying coastal areas. It can be approached in
fundamentally different ways and five major categories are described
in this chapter (Box 4.3): Protection reduces coastal risk and impacts
by blocking the inland propagation and other effects of mean or
extreme sea levels hazards (e.g., through dikes, seawalls, storm
surge barriers, breakwaters, beach-dune systems, etc.). Advance
creates new land by building seawards (e.g., reclamation of new land
above sea levels or planting vegetation with the specific intention
to support natural accretion of land). Ecosystem-based adaptation
(EbA) provides a combination of the benefits of protect and advance
strategies based on the conservation and restoration of ecosystems
such as reefs and coastal vegetation. Accommodation includes a
diverse set of biophysical and institutional responses to reduce
vulnerability of coastal residents, human activities, ecosystems and
the built environment (e.g., raising buildings, planting salt tolerant
crops, insurance and EWS for ESL events). Retreat reduces exposure
to coastal hazards by moving people, assets and human activities out
of the exposed coastal area.

Each type of response has particular advantages and disadvantages,
and may play a synergistic role in an integrated and sequenced
response to SLR. For example, hard protection needs less space and
its effectiveness is more predictable than for EbA (high confidence;
4.4.2.2.4, 4.4.2.3.4). EbA has advantages of contributing to
conservation goals and providing additional ecosystem services such
as carbon sequestration and improved water quality (4.4.2.2.5). EbA
can become more effective over time, because coastal ecosystems can
migrate inland with rising sea levels, provided this is not restricted
by infrastructure (4.4.2.2.4). In practise, hard, sediment-based and
ecosystem-based protection responses are often combined and there
is high agreement that such hybrid approaches are a promising way
forward (4.4.2.3.1). Advance is an option widely practised when land
is scarce and offers the opportunity to finance adaptation through
land sale revenues, but can also increase exposure and destroy coastal
wetlands and their protective function (4.4.2.4). Accommodation
measures such as flood proofing buildings, flood forecasting, early
warning and emergency planning have high benefit-cost ratios,
which means that implementing them is much cheaper than doing
nothing (4.4.2.5.6). Retreat, and avoidance of development in some
locations, are the only types of responses that eliminate residual
risks, assuming there is sufficiently safe alternative land to retreat to
or develop (4.4.2.6, Cross-Chapter Box 9).

Given diverse geographies and contexts (4.1.3), and the pros and
cons of different responses, there is no silver bullet for responding to
SLR. Rather, each coastal locality requires a tailor-made response that
uses an appropriate mix of measures, sequenced over time as sea
level rises. Possible integrated response strategies are illustrated for
two contrasting types of settlements: densely populated urban and
sparsely populated rural coasts.

For densely populated urban low elevation areas, including continental
and island cities and megacities, hard protection has played and

Chapter 4

will continue to play the central role in response strategies (4.4.2.2,
Box 4.1). In general, it is technologically feasible and economically
efficient to protect large parts of cities against 21st century SLR (high
confidence; 4.4.2.2.4, 4.4.2.7). However, questions of affordability
remain for poorer and developing regions (4.3.3.4, 4.4.2.2.3). In
cities, advance can offer a way to finance coastal protection through
revenues generated from newly created land (4.4.2.4), but raises
equity concerns with regard to the distribution of costs and access
to the new land (4.4.2.4.6). Where space is available, EbA can
supplement hard protection (4.4.2.3), except in situations where
other human interventions, like infrastructure and pollution, interfere
with EbA, especially for RCP8.5 (Cross-Chapter Box 9). Retreat may
currently be favoured over rebuilding in the aftermath of major
flooding disasters, but in densely populated areas protected by hard
infrastructure, general retreat need not be considered until later in
the century once it is known whether or not SLR will reach the higher
end of the projections (1.1 m or more by 2100; 4.4.2.6).

Along sparsely populated rural coasts, safeguarding communities
by conserving coastal ecosystems and natural morphodynamic
processes, and restoring those already degraded, is the central
element of an integrated strategy. Intact coastal ecosystems can
protect settlements and, in some contexts, natural sedimentation
processes and avoiding sand mining can help to raise exposed land
(4.4.2.2). Hard coastal protection can lead to flooding or erosion
elsewhere (4.4.2.2.5), and the destruction of ecosystems and the
coastal protection they offer (4.3.3.5). Ecosystem health can be
further maintained by reducing non-climatic drivers such as those
that interrupt sediment flows in deltas and estuaries (4.3.2.3). Hard
protection may be appropriate for areas containing high value assets
(e.g., settlements and cultural sites). Retreat is worth considering
now where coastal population size and density is low, risks are
already high, and the economic, cultural and sociopolitical impacts of
retreat and resettlement are carefully considered and addressed by
at-risk communities and their governing authorities.

Designing and implementing an appropriate mix of responses is not
only a technical task but also an inherently political and value-laden
social choice that involves trade-offs between multiple values, goals
and interests (Section 4.4.3). Specifically, distinctive features of SLR
together with this complex nature of social choices give rise to five
overarching governance challenges (Section 4.4.3.3):

1. Time horizon and uncertainty associated with SLR beyond
2050 challenge standard planning and decision making practises
(high confidence).

2. Cross-scale and cross-domain coordination linking differing
jurisdictional levels, sectors and policy domains is often needed
for effective responses (medium confidence).

3. Equity and social vulnerability are often negatively affected
by SLR and also responses to SLR, which can undermine societal
aspirations such as achieving the SDGs (high confidence).

4. Social conflict (i.e. nonviolent struggle between groups,
organisations and communities over values, interests, resources,
and influence or power) caused or exacerbated by SLR could
escalate over time and become very difficult to resolve
(high confidence).

329

 
 

Chapter 4

5. Complexity, reinforced by the combination of the above
challenges, makes it difficult to understand and address SLR
(high confidence).

These governance challenges can be addressed through an integrated
combination of well-established and emerging planning, public
participation and conflict resolution practices (Section 4.4.4.2),
decision analysis methods (Section 4.4.4.3) and enabling conditions
(Section 4.4.5). For example, iterative planning and flexible, adaptive
and robust decision making (RDM) can help coastal communities to
plan for the future and account for SLR uncertainty. Planning can also
enable thinking and action across spatial, temporal and governance
scales and thus help to coordinate roles and responsibilities across
multiple governance levels. Public participation approaches can be
designed to account for divergent perspectives in making difficult
social choices, enhancing social learning, experimentation and
innovation in developing locally appropriate SLR responses. Conflict
resolution approaches have considerable potential to improve
adaptation prospects by harnessing the productive potential of
nonviolent conflict.

4.2 Physical Basis for Sea Level Change

and Associated Hazards

As a consequence of natural and anthropogenic changes in the
climate system, sea level changes are occurring on temporal and
spatial scales that threaten coastal communities, cities, and low-lying
islands. Sea level in this context means the time average height of
the sea surface, thus eliminating short duration fluctuations like
waves, surges and tides. GMSL rise refers to an increase in the
volume of ocean water caused by warmer water having a lower
density, and by the increase in mass caused by loss of land ice or a
net loss in terrestrial water reservoirs. Spatial variations in volume
changes are related to spatial changes in the climate. In addition,
mass changes due to the redistribution of water on the Earth’s
surface and deformation of the lithosphere leads to a change in the
Earth’s rotation and gravitational field, producing distinct spatial
patterns in regional sea level change. In addition to the regional
changes associated with contemporary ice and water redistribution,
the solid Earth may cause sea level changes due to tectonics, mantle
dynamics or glacial isostatic adjustment (see Section 4.2.1.5). These
processes cause vertical land motion (VLM) and sea surface height
changes at coastlines. Hence, RSL change is defined as the change in
the difference in elevation between the land and the sea surface at a
specific time and location (Farrell and Clark, 1976). Here, regional sea
level refers to spatial scales of around 100 km, while local sea level
refers to spatial scales smaller than 10 km.

In most places around the world, current annual mean rates of RSL
changes are typically on the order of a few mm yr (see Figure 4.6).
Risk associated with changing sea level also is related to individual
events that have a limited duration, superimposed on the background
of these gradual changes. As a result, the gradual changes in time
and space have to be assessed together with processes that lead
to flooding and erosion events. These processes include storm
surges, waves and tides or a combination of these processes and

330

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

lead to ESL events (see Figure 4.4). In this section, newly emerging
understanding of these different episodic and gradual aspects of
sea level change are assessed, within a context of sea level changes
measured directly over the last century, and those inferred for longer
geological time scales. This longer-term perspective is important for
contextualising future projections of sea level and providing guidance
for process-based models of the individual components of SLR, in
particular the ice sheets. In addition, anthropogenic subsidence may
affect local sea level substantially in many locations but this process
is not taken into account in values reported here for projected SLR
unless specifically noted.

4.2.1 Processes of Sea Level Change

Sea level changes have been discussed throughout the various
IPCC assessment reports as SLR is a key feature of climate change.
Complex interactions between the oceans and ice sheets only
recently have been recognised as important drivers of processes that
can lead to rapid dynamical changes in the ice sheets. Understanding
of basal melt below the ice shelves, ice calving processes and glacial
hydrological processes was also limited. Projections of future sea
level in the IPCC 4th Assessment Report (AR4; Lemke et al, 2007)
were presented with the caveat that dynamical ice sheet processes
were not accounted for, as our physical understanding of these
processes was too rudimentary and no literature could be assessed
(Bindoff et al., 2007). In AR5 (Church et al., 2013), a first attempt
was made to quantify the dynamic contribution of the ice sheets,
although still with modeling based on limited physcis, relying mainly
on an extrapolation of existing observations (Little et al, 2013) and
a single process based case study (Bindschadler et al., 2013). Here
the focus is on sea level changes around coastlines and low-lying
islands, updating the GMSL rise by including a new estimate of the
dynamic contribution of Antarctica. The mechanism driving past and
contemporary sea level changes and episodic extremes of sea level is
explained, and confidence in regional projections of future sea level
over the 21st century and beyond is assessed.

4.2.1.1 Ice Sheets and Ice Shelves

The ice sheets on Greenland and Antarctica contain most of the
fresh water on the Earth’s surface. As a consequence, they have the
greatest potential to cause changes in sea level. Figure 4.4 illustrates
the size of land ice reservoirs and the most important processes that
drive mass changes of ice sheets.

Ice sheets change sea level through the loss or gain of ice above
flotation, defined as the ice thickness in exceedance of the smallest
thickness that would remain in contact with the sea floor at
hydrostatic equilibrium. The GIS is currently losing mass at roughly
twice the pace of the AIS (Table 4.1). However, Antarctica contains
eight times more ice above flotation than Greenland. Furthermore,
a substantial fraction of the AIS rests on bedrock below sea level,
making the ice sheet responsive to changes in ocean-driven melt and
possibly vulnerable to marine ice sheet instabilities (Cross-Chapter
Box 8 in Chapter 3) that can drive rapid mass loss.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Ice sheets gain or lose mass through changes in surface mass
balance (SMB), the sum of accumulation and ablation controlled
by atmospheric processes, the loss of ice to the ocean though
melting of ice shelves, and by calving (breaking off of ice bergs) at
marine-terminating ice fronts (see Chapter 3). Ice shelves, the floating
extensions of grounded ice flowing into the ocean (Figure 4.4) do not
directly contribute to sea level, but they play an important role in
ice sheet dynamics by providing resistance to the seaward flow of
the grounded ice upstream (First et al., 2016; Reese et al., 2018b).
Ice shelves gain mass through the inflow of ice from the ice sheet,
precipitation, and accretion at the ice-ocean interface. They lose
mass through a combination of calving and by melting from below,
especially where basal ice is in contact with warm water (Paolo et al.,
2015, Khazendar et al, 2016). Calving rates at the terminus of marine
terminating ice fronts are governed by complex ice-mechanical
processes, the internal strength of the ice, and interaction with
ocean waves and tides (Benn et al., 2007; Bassis, 2011; Massom
et al., 2018). Sub-ice shelf melts rates are controlled by ice-ocean
interactions involving the large-scale circulation, more localised
heat and fresh water fluxes, and micro (mm)-scale processes in
the ice-ocean boundary layer (Gayen et al., 2015; Dinniman et al.,
2016; Schodlok et al., 2016). Ice shelves are also impacted by surface
processes. Where surface melt rates are high, ice shelves not only
lose mass, they can collapse (hydrofracture) from flexural stresses
caused by the movement of the meltwater and the deepening of
water-filled crevasses (Banwell et al., 2013; Macayeal and Sergienko,
2013; Kuipers Munneke et al., 2014). These complex ice-ocean
interactions, calving and hydrofracture processes remain difficult to
model, particularly at the scale of ice sheets.

Our understanding of ice sheets has progressed substantially since
AR5, although deep uncertainty (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1)
remains with regard to their potential contribution to future SLR on
time scales longer than a century under any given emissions scenario.
This is particularly true for Antarctica.

4.2.1.2 Glaciers

Glaciers outside of the GIS and AIS are important contributors to sea
level change (Figure 4.4). Because of their specific accumulation and
ablation rates, which are often high compared to those of the ice
sheets, they are sensitive indicators of climate change and respond
quickly to changes in climate. Over the past century, glaciers have
added more mass to the ocean than the GIS and AIS combined
(Gregory et al., 2013). However, the mass of glaciers is small by
comparison, equivalent to only 0.32 + 0.08 m mean SLR if only the
fraction of ice above sea level is considered (Farinotti et al., 2019).
Sections 2.2.3, 3.3.2 and Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 2 provide a
detailed discussion of glacier response to climate change.

4.2.1.3 Ocean Processes

In general, increasing temperatures lead to a lower density (‘thermal
expansion’) and therefore the larger its volume per unit of mass.
Thus, warming leads to a higher sea level even when the ocean mass
remains constant. Over at least the last 1500 years changes in sea level
were related to global mean temperatures (Kopp et al., 2016), partly

Chapter 4

because of ice mass loss, and partly because of thermal expansion.
Models and observations indicate that over recent decades, more
than 90% of the increase in energy in the climate system has been
stored in the ocean. Hence, thermal expansion provides insight into
climate sensitivity (Church et al., 2013). Findings from sea level
studies and the energy budget are consistent (Otto et al., 2013). As
thermal expansion per degree is dependent on the temperature itself,
heat uptake by a warm region has a larger impact on SLR than heat
uptake by a cold region. This contributes to regional changes in sea
level, which are also caused by the water temperature and salinity
variations (e.g., Lowe and Gregory, 2006; Suzuki and Ishii, 2011;
Bouttes et al., 2014; Saenko et al, 2015). Regional patterns in sea
level change are also modified from the global average by oceanic
and atmospheric (fluid) dynamics (Griffies and Greatbatch, 2012),
including trends in ocean currents, redistribution of temperature and
salinity (sea water density), buoyancy, and atmospheric pressure. An
analysis of these trends in Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
Phase 5 (CMIP5) General Circulation Models (GCMs; Yin, 2012)
demonstrates the potential for >15 cm of SLR by 2100 and >30 cm
by 2300 (RCP8.5) along the east coast of the USA and Canada
from fluid dynamical processes alone. However, Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6) GCM simulations are not
yet available for an updated analysis of these processes in SROCC.
4.2.1.4 Terrestrial Reservoirs

Global sea level changes are also affected by changes in terrestrial
reservoirs of liquid water. Withdrawal of groundwater and storage
of fresh water through dam construction (Chao et al., 2008; Fiedler
and Conrad, 2010) in the earlier parts of the 20th century dominated,
leading to sea level fall, but in recent decades, land water depletion
due to domestic, agricultural and industrial usage has begun to
contribute to sea level change (Wada et al, 2017). Changes in
terrestrial reservoirs may also be related to climate variability: in
particular, the El Nifio Southern Oscillation (ENSO) has a strong
impact on precipitation distribution and temporary storage of water
on continents (Boening et al, 2012; Cazenave et al., 2012; Fasullo
et al., 2013).

4.2.1.5. Geodynamic Processes

Changing distributions of water mass between land, ice and ocean
reservoirs cause nearly instantaneous changes in the Earth’s gravity
field and rotation, and elastic deformation of the solid Earth. These
processes combine to produce spatially varying patterns of sea level
change (Mitrovica et al., 2001; Mitrovica et al, 2011). For example,
adjacent to an ice sheet losing mass, reduced gravitational attraction
between the ice and nearby ocean causes RSL to fall, despite the rise
in GMSL from the input of melt water to the ocean. The opposite
effect is found far from the ice sheet, where RSL rise can be enhanced
as much as 30% relative to the global average.

On time scales longer than the elastic Earth response, redistributions
of water and ice cause time-dependent, visco-elastic deformation. This
is observed in regions previously covered by ice during the Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM), including much of Scandinavia and parts of North
America (Lambeck et al., 1998; Peltier, 2004), where glacio-isostatic

331

 
 

Chapter 4

adjustment (GIA) is causing uplift and a lowering of RSL that continues
today. In other locations proximal to the previous ice load, and where
a glacial forebulge once existed, the relaxing forebulge can contribute
to a relative SLR, as currently being experienced along the coastline of
the northeast United States. Water being syphoned to high latitudes
as the peripheral bulges collapse leads to a widespread RSL fall in
equatorial regions, while the overall loading of ocean crust by melt
water can cause uplift of land areas near continental margins, far from
the location of previous ice loading (Mitrovica and Milne, 2003; Milne
and Mitrovica, 2008). Rates of modern VLM associated with these
post-glacial processes are generally on the order of a few mm yr
or less, but can exceed 1 cm yr! in some places. Because these
gravity, rotation, and deformation (GRD) processes control spatial
patterns of SLR from melting land ice, they need to be accounted for
in regional-to-local sea level assessments. GRD processes are also
important for marine-based ice sheets themselves, because they
locally reduce RSL at retreating grounding lines which can slow and
reduce retreat (Gomez et al., 2015; see 4.3.3.1.2 and Cross-chapter
Box 8 in Chapter 3; Larour et al., 2019).

VLM from tectonics and dynamic topography associated with viscous
mantle processes also affect spatial patterns of relative sea level change.
These geological processes are important for reconstructing ancient
sea levels based on geological indicators (Austermann and Mitrovica,
2015; see SM4.1). Along with other natural and anthropogenic
processes including volcanism, compaction, and anthropogenic
subsidence from ground water extraction (Section 4.2.2.4) these
geodynamic processes can be locally important, producing rates of
VLM comparable to or greater than recent climate-driven rates of
GMSL change (Wéppelmann and Marcos, 2016). In this chapter, GIA

    
     

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

and anthropogenic subsidence are used, and other components of VLM
are ignored unless explicitly stated.

4.2.1.6 Extreme Sea Level Events

Superimposed on gradual changes in RSL, as described in the previous
sections, tides, storm surges, waves and other high-frequency
processes (Figure 4.4) can be important. Understanding the localised
impact of such processes requires detailed knowledge of bathymetry,
erosion and sedimentation, as well as a good description of the
temporal variability of the wind fields generating waves and storm
surges. The potential for compounding effects, like storm surge
and high SLR, are of particular concern as they can contribute
significantly to flooding risks and extreme events (Little et al., 2015a).

These processes can be captured by hydrodynamical models (see
Section 4.2.3.4).

4.2.2 Observed Changes in Sea Level

(Past and Present)

Sea level changes in the distant geologic past provide information
on the size of the ice sheets in climate states different from today.
Past intervals with temperatures comparable to or warmer than
today are of particular interest, and since AR5 (Masson-Delmotte
et al., 2013) they have been increasingly used to test and calibrate
process-based ice sheet models used in future projections (DeConto
and Pollard, 2016; Edwards et al., 2019; Golledge et al., 2019). These
intervals include the mPWP around 3.3-3.0 Ma, when atmospheric
CO concentrations were similar to today (~300—450 ppmvy; Badger
et al., 2013; Martinez-Boti et al., 2015; Stap et al, 2016) and global

Greenland : Antarctic
Glaciers
Ea Ice Sheet Ea Ei Ice Sheet
(7mSLE) (0.5 mSLE) yA (58m SLE)
Gravitational ane Winds Calving Accumulation

  
   
     

( Global drivers Level of Time scale
|| Regional drivers understanding of adjustment
|| Coastal drivers +++ High >>> Fast
|| Ice processes ++ Medium >> Medium
General terms + Low > Slow

     

   

   

Surface melt

——

Extreme sea level

   
 
 
  
 

Figure 4.4 | A schematic illustration of the climate and non-climate driven processes that can influence global, regional (green colours), relative and extreme sea level
(ESL) events (red colours) along coasts. Major ice processes are shown in purple and general terms in black. SLE stands for Sea Level Equivalent and reflects the increase
in GMSL if the mentioned ice mass is melted completely and added to the ocean.

332
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

mean temperature was 2°C—4°C warmer than pre-industrial (Dutton
et al., 2015a; Haywood et al., 2016) and the LIG around 129-116 ka,
when global mean temperature was 0.5°C-1.0°C warmer (Capron
et al., 2014; Dutton et al., 2015a; Fischer et al., 2018) and sea surface
temperatures were similar to today (Hoffman et al, 2017). Updated
reconstructions of GMSL (Dutton et al, 2015a) based on ancient
shoreline elevations corrected to account for geodynamic processes
(4.2.1.5), and geochemical records extracted from marine sediment
cores, indicate sea levels were >5 m higher than today during these
past warm periods (medium confidence).

Most estimates of peak GMSL during the mPWP range between 6
and 30 m higher than today (Miller et al., 2012; Rovere et al, 2014;
Dutton et al., 2015a) but with deep uncertainty (Cross-Chapter Box 5
in Chapter 1) and few constraints on the high end of the range. The
large uncertainty is contributed by uncertain GIA corrections applied
to palaeo shoreline indicators (Raymo et al., 2011; Rovere et al., 2014),
dynamic topography, the vertical land surface motion associated
with Earth’s mantle flow (Rowley et al., 2013), and possible biases
in geochemical records of ice volume derived from marine sediments
(Raymo et al., 2018). Estimates of GMSL >10 m higher than today
require a meltwater contribution from the East Antarctic Ice Sheet in
addition to the GIS and West Antarctic Ice Sheets (WAIS; Miller et al.,
2012; Dutton et al., 2015a). Pliocene modelling studies appearing
since AR5 (Masson-Delmotte et al., 2013) demonstrate the potential
for substantial retreat of East Antarctic ice into deep submarine
basins (Austermann and Mitrovica, 2015; Pollard et al., 2015; Aitken
et al., 2016; DeConto and Pollard, 2016; Gasson et al., 2016; Golledge
et al., 2019), as does emerging geological evidence from marine
sediment cores recovered from the East Antarctic margin (Cook
et al., 2013; Patterson et al., 2014; Bertram et al., 2018). However,
the range of maximum Pliocene GMSL contributions from Antarctic
modelling (Austermann and Mitrovica, 2015; Pollard et al, 2015;
Yamane et al., 2015; DeConto and Pollard, 2016; Gasson et al., 2016)
remains large (5.4-17.8 m), providing little additional constraint on
the geological estimates. Land surface exposure measurements on
sediment sourced from East Antarctica (Shakun et al., 2018) suggests
Pliocene ice loss was limited to marine-based ice, where the bedrock
is below sea level and possibly prone to marine ice sheet instabilities
(Cross-Chapter box 8 in Chapter 3). The total potential contribution
to GMSL rise from marine-based ice in Antarctica is ~22.5 m (Fretwell
et al, 2013). Combined with the complete loss of the GIS, this could
conceivably produce ~30 m of GMSL rise. However, this would
require maximum retreat of GIS and AIS to be synchronous, which is
not probable due to orbitally paced, inter-hemispheric asymmetries
in Greenland and Antarctic climate (de Boer et al., 2017). As such,
25 m is found to be a reasonable upper bound on GMSL during the
mPWP. but with /ow confidence.

An updated estimate of maximum GMSL during the more geologically
recent LIG ranges between 6-9 m higher than today (Dutton et al.,
2015a). This is close to the values reported by a probabilistic analysis of
globally distributed sea level indicators (Kopp et al., 2009), but slightly
higher than AR5’s central estimate of 6 m. Like the mid-Pliocene, the
LIG estimates also suffer from uncertainties in GIA corrections and
dynamic topography. Diisterhus et al. (2016) applied data assimilation
techniques including GIA corrections to the same LIG dataset used

Chapter 4

by Kopp et al. (2009) and found good agreement (7.5 + 1.1 m likely
range) with Kopp et al. (2009) and Dutton et al. (2015a), but the
upper range remains poorly constrained. Their estimates of peak LIG
sea level are sensitive to the assumed ice history before and after the
LIG, consistent with the results of other studies (Lambeck et al., 2012;
Dendy et al., 2017). Austermann et al. (2017) compared a compilation
of LIG shoreline indicators with dynamic topography simulations.
They found that vertical surface motions driven by mantle convection
can produce several metres of uncertainty in LIG sea level estimates,
but their mean and most probable estimates of 6.7 m and 6.4 m are
broadly in line with other estimates.

Greenland and Antarctic climate change on these time scales is
influenced by inter-hemispheric differences in polar amplification
(Stap et al, 2018), changes in Earth’s orbit, and long-term climate
system processes. This complicates relationships between global
mean temperature and ice sheet response. On Greenland, the
magnitude of LIG summer warming and changes in ice sheet volume
continue to be contested. Extreme summer warming of 6°C or more,
reconstructed from ice cores (Dahl-Jensen et al., 2013; Landais et al.,
2016; Yau et al., 2016) and lake archives (McFarlin et al., 2018)
is in apparent conflict with a persistent, spatially extensive GIS
reconstructed from ice cores and radar imaging (Dahl-Jensen et al.,
2013). Maximum retreat of the GIS during the LIG varies widely
among modelling studies, ranging from ~1 m to ~6 m (Helsen et al.,
2013; Quiquet et al., 2013; Dutton et al., 2015a; Goelzer et al., 2016;
Yau et al., 2016); however, the models consistently indicate a small
Greenland contribution to GMSL early in the interglacial, implying
Antarctica was the dominant contributor to the early interglacial
highstand of 6 + 1.5 m, beginning around 129 ka (Dutton et al.,
2015b). An early LIG loss of Antarctic ice is consistent with recent
ice sheet modelling (DeConto and Pollard, 2016; Goelzer et al.,
2016). Due to its bedrock configuration and susceptibility to marine
ice sheet instabilities (Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3), the WAIS
would have been especially vulnerable to subsurface ocean warming
during the LIG (Sutter et al., 2016). However, most evidence of WAIS
retreat during the LIG remains indirect (Steig et al., 2015) and firm
geological evidence has yet to be uncovered. A recent analysis of East
Antarctic sediments provides evidence of some ice retreat in Wilkes
subglacial basin during the LIG (Wilson and Forsyth, 2018), but the
volume of ice loss is not quantified.

GMSL during the LIG was at times higher than today (virtually certain),
with a /ikely range between 6-9 m, and not expected to be more
than 10 m (medium confidence). Due to ongoing uncertainties in
the evolution of atmospheric and oceanic warming over and around
the ice sheets, and low confidence in the relative contributions of
Antarctic versus Greenland meltwater to GMSL change, the LIG
is not used here to directly assess the sensitivity of the ice sheets
under current or future climate conditions. There is low confidence
in the utility of changes in either mPWP or LIG sea level changes to
quantitatively inform near-term future rates of GMSL rise.

An expanded summary of recent advances and ongoing difficulties
in reconstructing these time periods in terms of climate, sea level,
and implications for the future evolution of ice sheets and sea level
is provided in SM4.1.

333

 
 

Chapter 4

4.2.2.1. Global Mean Sea Level Changes During

the Instrumental Period

Observational estimates of the sea level variations over past
millennia rely essentially on proxy-based regional relative sea
level reconstructions corrected for GIA. Since AR5, the increasing
availability of regional proxy-based reconstructions enables the
estimation of GMSL change over the last ~3 kyr. The first statistical
integration of the available reconstructions shows that the GMSL
experienced variations of +9 [+7 to +11] cm (5-95% uncertainty
range; Kopp et al., 2016) over the 2400 years preceding the 20th
century (medium confidence). This is more tightly bound than the AR5
assessment which indicated a variability in GMSL that was <+25 cm
over the same period. This progress since AR5 confirms that it is
virtually certain that the mean rate of GMSL has increased during the
last two centuries from relatively low rates of change during the late
Holocene (order tenths of mm yr’) to modern rates (order mm yr;
Woodruff et al., 2013).

Over the last two centuries, sea level observations have mostly
relied on tide gauge measurements. These records, beginning around
1700 in some locations (Holgate et al., 2012; PSMSL, 2019), provide
insight into historic sea level trends. Since 1992, the emergence of
precise satellite altimetry has advanced our knowledge on GMSL and
regional sea level changes considerably through a combination of
near global ocean coverage and high spatial resolution. It has also
enabled more detailed monitoring of land ice loss. Since 2002, high
precision gravity measurements provided by the Gravity Recovery
and Climate Experiment (GRACE) and GRACE Follow-On missions
show the loss of land ice in Greenland and Antarctica, and confirm
independent assessments of ice sheet mass changes based on
satellite altimetry (Shepherd et al., 2012; The Imbie team, 2018)
and InSAR measurements combined with ice sheet SMB estimates
(Noél et al., 2018; Rignot et al., 2019). Since 2006, when the array
of Argo profiling floats reached near-global coverage, it has been
possible to get an accurate estimate of the ocean thermal expansion
(down to 2000 m depth) and test the closure of the sea level
budget. The combined analysis of the different observing systems
that are available has improved significantly the understanding of
the magnitude and relative contributions of the different processes
causing sea level change. In particular, important progress has been
achieved since AR5 on estimating and understanding the increasing
contribution of the ice sheets to SLR.

4.2.2.1.1 Tide gauge records

The number of tide gauges has increased over time from only a few in
northern Europe in the 18th century to more than 2000 today along
the world’s coastlines. Because of their location and limited number,
tide gauges sample the ocean sparsely and non-uniformly with a bias
towards the Northern Hemisphere. Most tide gauge records are short
and have significant gaps. In addition, tide gauges are anchored
on land and are affected by the vertical motion of Earth’s crust
caused by both natural processes (e.g., GIA, tectonics and sediment
compaction; Woppelmann and Marcos, 2016; Pfeffer et al., 2017) and
anthropogenic activities (e.g., groundwater depletion, dam building

334

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

or settling of landfill in urban areas; Raucoules et al., 2013; Pfeffer
et al., 2017). When estimating the GMSL due to the ocean thermal
expansion and land ice melt, tide gauges must be corrected for this
VLM, where VLM = GIA + anthropogenic subsidence + (tectonics,
natural subsidence). This is possible with stations of the Global
Positioning System (GPS) network when they are co-located with
tide gauges (Santamaria-Gémez et al., 2017; Kleinherenbrink et al.,
2018). However, this approach provides information on the VLM over
the past two to three decades and has limited value over longer time
scales for places where the VLM has varied significantly through the
last century (Riva et al., 2017).

AR5 assessed the different strategies to estimate the 20th century
GMSL changes. These strategies only accounted for the inhomogeneous
space and time coverage of tide gauge data and for the VLM induced
by GIA (Figure 4.5). Since AR5 two new approaches have been
developed. The first one uses a Kalman smoother which combines tide
gauge records with the spatial patterns associated with ocean dynamic
change, change in land ice and GIA. It enables accounting for the
inhomogeneous distribution of tide gauges and the VLM associated
with both GIA and current land ice loss (Hay et al., 2015; Figure 4.5).
The second approach uses ad hoc corrections to tide gauge records
with an additional spatial pattern associated with changes in terrestrial
water storage to account for the inhomogeneous distribution in tide
gauges. It also accounts for the total VLM (Dangendorf et al., 2017;
Figure 4.5). Both methods yield significantly lower GMSL changes
over the period 1950-1970 than previous estimates, leading to
long-term trends since 1900 that are smaller than previous estimates
by 0.4 mm yr' (Figure 4.5). Different arguments including biases in
the tide gauge datasets (Hamlington and Thompson, 2015), biases in
the averaging technique and absence of VLM correction (Dangendorf
et al., 2017), or in the spatial patterns associated with the sea level
contributions (Hamlington et al., 2018) have been proposed to
explain these smaller GMSL rates. There is no agreement yet on which
is the primary reason for the differences and it is not clear whether
all the reasons invoked can actually explain all the differences
across reconstructions. As there is no clear evidence to discard any
reconstruction, this assessment considers the ensemble of AR5 sea
level reconstructions augmented by the two recent reconstructions
from Hay et al. (2015) and Dangendorf et al. (2017) to evaluate the
GMSL changes over the 20th century. On this basis, it is estimated
that it is very likely that the long-term trend in GMSL estimated from
tide gauge records is 1.5 (1.1-1.9) mm yr" between 1902 and 2010
for a total SLR of 0.16 (0.12-0.21) m (see also Table 4.1) over this
period. This estimate is consistent with the AR5 assessment (but with
an increased uncertainty range) and confirms that it is virtually certain
that GMSL rates over the 20th century are several times as large as
GMSL rates during the late Holocene (see 4.2.2.1). Over the 20th
century the GMSL record also shows an acceleration (high confidence)
as now four out of five reconstructions extending back to at least
1902 show a robust acceleration (Jevrejeva et al., 2008; Church and
White, 2011; Ray and Douglas, 2011; Haigh et al, 2014b; Hay et al,
2015; Watson, 2016; Dangendorf et al., 2017). The estimates of the
acceleration ranges between -0.002-0.019 mm yr over 1902-2010
are consistent with AR5.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

4.2.2.1.2 Satellite altimetry

High precision satellite altimetry started in October 1992 with the
launch of the TOPEX/Poseidon and Jason series of spacecraft. Since
then, 11 satellite altimeters have been launched providing nearly
global sea level measurements (up to +82°latitude) over more
than 25 years. Six groups (AVISO/CNES, SL_cci/ESA, University of
Colorado, CSIRO, NASA/GSFC, NOAA; Nerem et al., 2010; Henry
et al., 2014; Leuliette, 2015; Watson et al., 2015; Beckley et al., 2017;
Legeais et al., 2018) provide altimetry-based GMSL time series. Since
ARS, several studies using two independent approaches based on
tide gauge records (Watson et al., 2015) and the sea level budget
closure (Chen et al, 2017; Dieng et al., 2017) identified a drift of
1.5 (0.4-3.4) mm yr" in TOPEX A from January 1993 to February
1999. Accounting for this drift leads to a revised GMSL rate from
satellite altimetry of 3.16 (2.79-3.53) for 1993-2015 (WCRP
Global Sea Level Budget Group, 2018; see Table 4.1) compared to
3.3 mm yr" (2.7-3.9) for 1993-2010 in AR5. Compared to ARS,
the revised satellite altimetry GMSL estimates now show with high
confidence an acceleration of 0.084 (0.059-0.090) mm yr" over
1993-2015 (5-95% uncertainty range; Watson et al., 2015; Nerem
et al. 2018). This acceleration is due to an increase in Greenland
mass loss since the 2000s (Chen et al., 2017; Dieng et al., 2017) and
a slight increase in all other contributions probably partly due to
the recovery from the Pinatubo volcanic eruption in 1991 (Fasullo
et al, 2016) and partly due to increased GHG concentrations
eg., (Slangen et al., 2016; high confidence). The current sea level
rise is 3.6 + 0.3 mm yr" over 2006-2015 (90% confidence level).
This is the highest rate measured by satellite altimetry (Ablain et al.,
2019; medium confidence). Before the satellite altimetry era, the
highest rate of sea level rise recorded was reached during the period
1935-1944. It amounted 2.5 + 0.7 mm yr (estimate at the 90%
confidence level from sea level reconstructions; Church and White,
2011; Ray and Douglas, 2011; Jevrejeva et al., 2008; Hay et al., 2015;
Dangendorf et al., 2017). This is expected to be smaller than the
current rate of sea level rise, making the current sea level rise the
highest on instrumental record (medium confidence).

4.2.2.2. Contributions to Global Mean Sea Level Change
During the Instrumental Period

The different contributions to the GMSL rise are independently
observed over various time scales. They are compared with simulated
estimates from climate model experiments of CMIP5 (Taylor et al.,
2012) when available (see Table 4.1). The observations are compared
with experiments beginning in the mid-19th century, forced with
past time-dependent anthropogenic changes in atmospheric
composition, natural forcings due to volcanic aerosols and variations
in solar irradiance (Taylor et al., 2012). The objective is first, to assess
understanding of the causes of observed sea level changes and
second, to evaluate the ability of coupled climate models to simulate
these causes. It enables the evaluation of the confidence level there
is in current coupled climate models that form the basis of future sea
level projections.

Chapter 4

4.2.2.2.1_ Thermal expansion contribution

The ocean thermal expansion is caused by excess heat being
absorbed by the ocean, as the climate warms. Thermal expansion is
estimated from in situ ocean observations and ocean heat content
reanalyses that rely on assimilation of data into numerical models
(Storto et al., 2017; Sections 1.8.1.1 and 1.8.1.4; WCRP Global Sea
Level Budget Group, 2018). Full-depth, high-quality and unbiased
ocean temperature profile data with adequate metadata and
spatio-temporal coverage are required to estimate thermal expansion
and to understand drivers of variability and long-term change (Pfeffer
et al., 2018; Section 5.2.2.2.2).

Historically, however, observational gaps exist and some ocean
regions remain under-sampled to date (Sections 1.8.1.1 and
5.2.2.2.2; Figure 1.3; Appendix 1.A, Figure 1.1). Other factors also
introduce uncertainty in estimates of thermal expansion like changes
in instrumentation, systematic instrumental errors, changes in
the quality control of the data and the mapping method used to
produce regular grids (Section 5.2.2.2.2; Palmer et al., 2010). In the
upper 700 m, the largest sources of uncertainty for estimates of
global mean thermal expansion from 1970 to 2004 are the choice
of mapping methods (Boyer et al., 2016), followed by the choice
of bias correction for the bathythermographic observations (Cheng
et al., 2016; Section 5.2.2.2.2). From 2006 onwards, the uncertainty
is considerably reduced (Roemmich et al., 2015; von Schuckmann
et al, 2016; Wijffels et al., 2016), because the Argo array reached
its targeted near-global (up to +60°latitude) coverage for the upper
2000 m in November 2007 (Riser et al., 2016; Section 5.2.2.2.2).

Since ARS, in a community effort, the (WCRP Global Sea Level Budget
Group, 2018) revisited the global mean thermal expansion estimates
based on observations only. On the basis of a full-depth 13-member
ensemble of global mean thermal expansion time series developed
with the latest data and corrections available, they estimated that
the global thermal expansion was 1.40 (1.08-1.72) mm yr" for
2006-2015, 1.36 (0.96-1.76) mm yr" for 1993-2015 (see Table 4.1).
While the relative contribution of the upper 300 m did not change
(~70%) between 2006-2015 and 1993-2015, the 700-2000 m
contribution increased around 10% over the Argo decade (2006-
2015), when observations for that depth interval soared (Figure 1.3;
Appendix 1.A, Figure 1.1). This suggests that observed changes for
700-2000 m may have been underestimated for 1993-2005. Before
1993, estimates are based on a smaller ensemble of 4 datasets in
which no thermal expansion is assumed below 2000 m because of
lack of data (see Section 5.2.2.2.2 for more details). This ensemble
shows a thermal expansion linear rate of 0.89 (0.84-0.94) mm yr!
for 1970-2015 (see Table 4.1).

Coupled climate models simulate the historical thermal expansion
(see Table 4.1). However, for models that omit the volcanic forcing
in their control experiment, the imposition of the historical volcanic
forcing during the 20th century results in a spurious time mean
negative forcing and a spurious persistent ocean cooling related to
the control climate (Gregory, 2010; Gregory et al, 2013). Since ARS,
the magnitude of this effect has been estimated from historical

335

 
Chapter 4 Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Table 4.1 | Global mean sea level (GMSL) budget over different periods from observations and from climate model base contributions. All values are in mm yr, Values
in brackets in 4.2 are uncertainties ranging from 595%. The climate model historical simulations end in 2005; projections for Representative Concentration Pathway
(RCP)8.5 are used for 2006-2015. The modelled thermal expansion, glacier and ice sheet surface mass balance (SMB) contributions are computed from the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) models as in Slangen et al. (201 7b). For the model contributions, uncertainties are estimated from the spread of the ensemble of
model simulations following Slangen et al. (2017b), see the footnotes for the details on the uncertainty propagation. GIS is Greenland Ice Sheet.

Sepa) 1901-1990 1970-2015

Observed contribution to GMSL rise

1993-2015 2006-2015

 

Thermal expansion

0.89 (0.84-0.94) *

1.36 (0.96-1.76) *

1.40 (1.08-1.72)?

 

Glaciers except in Greenland and Antarctica

0.49 (0.34-0.64)°

0.46 (0.21-0.72)°

0,56 (0.34-0.78) P

0.61 (0.53-0.69)"

 

GIS including peripheral glaciers

0.40 (0.23-0.57)°

0.46 {0.21-0.71)4

 

Antarctica ice sheet including peripheral glaciers

0.29 (0.11-0.47)®

{

{
0.77 {0.72-0.82)4
0,43 (0.34-0.52)®

 

Land water storage

-0.12F

-0.077

0.09

-0.21 {-0.36-0.06)9

 

Ocean mass

2.23 (2.07-2.39)"

 

Total contributions

2.76 (2.21-3.31)

3.00 (2.62-3.38)!

 

Observed GMSL rise from tide gauges and altimetry

1.38 (0.81-1.95)

2.06 (1.77-2.34)/

3.16 (2.79-3.53)!

3.58 (3.10-4.06)*

 

Modelled contributions to GMSL rise

 

Thermal expansion

0.32 (0.04-0.60)

0.97 (0.45-1.48)

1.48 (0.86-2.11)

1.52 {0.96-2.09)

 

Glaciers

0,53 (0.38-0.68)

0.73 (0.50-0.95)

0,99 (0.60-1 38)

1.10 (0.64-1.56)

 

Greenland SMB

-0.02 {-0.05-0.02)

0.03 (-0.01-0.07)

0.08 (-0.01-0.16)

0.12 (-0.02-0.26)

 

Total including land water storage and ice discharge!

0.71 (0.39-1.03)

1,88 (1.31-2.45)

3.13 (2.38-3.88)

3.54 (2.79-4.29)

 

 

Residual with respect to observed GMSL rise”

 

0.67 (0.02-1.32)

 

0.18 (-0.46-0.82)

 

0.03 (-0.81-0.87)

 

0.04 (-0.85-0.93)

 

 

Notes:

(a) The number is built from WCRP Global Sea Level Budget Group (2018) estimate of the 0-700 m depth thermal expansion, assuming no trend below 2000 m depth before
1992 and the mean value from Purkey and Johnson (2010), and Desbruyéres et al. (2017) afterwards.

(b) The number is calculated as the mean between the estimate from a reconstruction of glacier mass balance based on glacier length (update of Leclercq et al. (2011)) and the
estimate from a mass balance model forced with atmospheric observations (Marzeion et al., 2015). The uncertainty is assumed to be a gaussian with a standard deviation
of half the difference between the two estimates.

(c)_ The number is calculated as the sum of the Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS) contribution from Kjeldsen et al. (2015) and the peripheral glaciers’ contribution. The peripheral
glaciers’ contribution and the associated uncertainty are computed from a mass balance model forced with atmospheric observations (Marzeion et al., 2015). The total
uncertainty is computed assuming that both uncertainties from the GIS contribution and from the peripheral glaciers’ contribution are independent.

(d) Numbers from Bamber et al. (2018). See Section 3.3.1 for more details.

 

(e) These numbers are the weighted average of the numbers from Bamber et al. (2018) and from The Imbie team (2018). The weights in the average are based on the
uncertainty associated to each estimate. See Section 3.3.1 for more details.

(f) Only direct anthropogenic contribution, from Wada et al. (2016).
(g) Land water storage estimated from Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment (GRACE) excluding glaciers, from WCRP Global Sea Level Budget Group (2018).
(h) Direct estimate of ocean mass from GRACE from WCRP Global Sea Level Budget Group (2018).

(i) Sum of the thermal expansion and the contributions from glaciers, GIS, Antarctica Ice Sheet (AIS) and land water storage. Uncertainties in the different contributions are
assumed as independent.

(j) Sea level reconstructions that end before 2015 have been extended to 2015 with the satellite altimetry record from Legeais et al. (2018). The uncertainty is derived from the
uncertainty of individual sea level reconstructions over the longest period available that start in 1970. The uncertainty from different sea level reconstructions are assumed
as independent.

(k) The mean estimate is from the satellite altimetry estimate in WCRP Global Sea Level Budget Group (2018) corrected for GIA and for the elastic response of the ocean crust
to present day mass redistribution (Frederikse et al, 2017; Lickley et al., 2018). The uncertainty is computed using the updated error budget of Ablain et al (2015).

(I) Land water storage is estimated from Wada et al. (2016) and ice discharge is deduced from Shepherd et al. (2012). The ice discharge contribution is assumed to be zero
before 1992. The uncertainties in the different contributions from coupled climate models are assumed independent.

(m) The uncertainties in the observed GMSL and the coupled climate models’ estimate of GMSL are assumed independent for the computation of the uncertainties
in the residuals.

(n) Numbers taken from Appendix 2.A.
(o) Numbers taken from Zemp et al. (2019), see Sections 2.2.3 and 3.3.2 for more details.

(p) The Number is calculated as the mean of the estimates of Zemp et al (2019) and Bamber et al. (2018). The uncertainties of the two estimates are assumed
to be independent of each other to obtain the uncertainty estimate of the mean.

336
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

simulations forced by only natural radiative forcing. Then it has been
used to correct the historical simulations forced with the full 20th
century forcing (Slangen et al. 2016; Slangen et al, 2017b). The
resulting ensemble mean of simulated thermal expansion provides
a good fit to the observations within the uncertainty ranges of both
models and observations (Slangen et al, 2017b; Cheng et al., 2019;
Table 4.1). The spread, which is essentially due to uncertainty in
radiative forcing and uncertainty in the modelled climate sensitivity
and ocean heat uptake efficiency (Melet and Meyssignac, 2015), is
still larger than the observational uncertainties (Gleckler et al., 2016;
Cheng et al., 2017; Table 4.1). Compared to ARS, the availability of
improved observed and modelled estimates of thermal expansion and
the good agreement between both confirm the high confidence level
in the simulated thermal expansion using climate models and the high
contidence level in their ability to project future thermal expansion.

4,2.2.2.2 Ocean mass observations from GRACE
and GRACE Follow-On

The ocean mass changes correspond to the sum of land ice and
terrestrial water storage changes. Since 2002, the GRACE and
GRACE follow-on missions provide direct estimates of the ocean
mass changes and thus they provide an independent estimate of
the sum of land ice and terrestrial water storage contributions to
sea level. Since AR5, GRACE-based estimates of the ocean mass
rates are increasingly consistent (WCRP Global Sea Level Budget
Group, 2018) because of the extended length of GRACE missions’
observations (over 15 years), the improved understanding of data
and methods for addressing GRACE limitations (e.g., noise filtering,
leakage correction and low-degree spherical harmonics estimates),
and the improved knowledge of geophysical corrections applied
to GRACE data (e.g., GIA). The most recent estimates (Dieng et al.,
2015b; Reager et al, 2016; Rietbroek et al., 2016; Chambers et al.,
2017; Blazquez et al, 2018; Uebbing et al., 2019) report a global
ocean mass increase of 1.7 (1.4-2.0) mm yr over 2003-2015 (see
also Table 4.1). The uncertainty arises essentially from differences
in the inversion method to compute the ocean mass (Chen et al.,
2013; Jensen et al., 2013; Johnson and Chambers, 2013; Rietbroek
et al., 2016), uncertainties in the geocentre motion and uncertainty
in the GIA correction (Blazquez et al., 2018; Uebbing et al., 2019). The
consistency between estimates of the global mean ocean mass on a
monthly time scale has also increased since ARS.

4,2.2.2.3 Glaciers

To assess the mass contribution of glaciers to sea level change, global
estimates are required. Recent updates and temporal extensions of
estimates obtained by different methods continue to provide very
high confidence in continuing glacier mass loss on the global scale
during the past decade (Bamber et al, 2018; Wouters et al., 2019;
Zemp et al., 2019), see Section 2.2.3 and Appendix 2.A for a detailed
discussion also on regional scales). Updates of the reconstructions
of Cogley (2009), Leclercq et al. (2011) and Marzeion et al. (2012),
presented and compared in Marzeion et al. (2015), show increased
agreement on rates of mass loss during the entire 20th century
(Marzeion et al, 2015), compared to earlier estimates reported by
AR5. The contribution of glaciers that may be missing in inventories

Chapter 4

or have already melted during the 20th century is hard to constrain
(Parkes and Marzeion, 2018), and there is fow confidence in their
estimated contribution. These glaciers are thus neglected in the
assessment of the sea level budget (Table 4.1).

While the agreement between the observational estimates of glacier
mass changes and the modelled estimates from glacier models
forced with climate model simulations has increased since AR5
(Slangen et al, 2017b), there is only medium confidence in the use of
glacier models to reconstruct sea level change because of the limited
number of well-observed glaciers available to evaluate models on
long time scales, and because of the small number of model-based
global glacier reconstructions.

4,2.2.2.4 Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets

Frequent observations of ice sheet mass changes have only been
available since the advent of space observations (see Section 3.3.1).
In the pre-satellite era, mass balance was geodetically reconstructed
only for the GIS (Kjeldsen et al., 2015). These geodetic reconstructions
empirically constrain the contribution of the GIS to SLR between
1900 and 1983 to 17.2 (10.7—23.2; Kjeldsen et al., 2015). During the
satellite era, three approaches have been developed to estimate ice
sheet mass balance: 1) Mass loss is estimated by direct measurements
of ice sheet height changes with satellite laser or radar altimetry in
combination with climatological/glaciological models for firn density
and compaction, 2) the input-output method combines measurements
of ice flow velocities estimated from satellite (synthetic aperture
radar or optical imagery) across key outlets with estimates of net
surface balance derived from ice thickness data, 3) space gravimetry
data yields direct estimate of the mass changes by inversion of the
anomalies in the gravity field (see Section 3.3.1 for more details). AR5
concluded that the three space-based methods give consistent results.
They agree in showing that the rate of SLR due to the GIS and Als’
contributions has increased since the early 1990s. Since AR5, up-to-
date observations confirm this statement with increased confidence
for both ice sheets (Rignot et al, 2019; see Section 3.3.1). The
assessment of the literature since AR5 made in Section 3.3.1 shows
that the contribution from Greenland to SLR over 2012-2016 (0.68
(0.64-0.72) mm yr) was similar to the contribution over 2002-2011
(0.73 (0.67-0.79) mmyr~) and extremely likely greater than over 1992—
2001 (0.02 (0.21-0.25) mm yr'). The contribution from Antarctica over
2012-2016 (0.55 (0.48-0.62) mm yr-') was extremely likely greater
than over the 2002-2011 period (0.23 (0.16-0.30) mm yr‘) and
likely greater than over the period 1992-2001 (0.14 (0.12-0.16); see
Section 3.3.1 for more details).

Here, the approach of Section 3.3.1 is followed, using the two
multi-method assessments from Bamber et al. (2018) and the IMBIE
team (2018) to evaluate the contribution of ice sheet mass loss to
SLR over 1993-2015 and 2006-2015 (see Table 4.1). These two
studies agree with results from the WCRP Global Sea Level Budget
Group (2018). For the estimation of the AIS contribution, Bamber
et al. (2018) and the The IMBIE team (2018) use similar but not
identical data sources and processing. Both studies find consistent
results within uncertainties over both periods. In Table 4.1, the results
of these two studies were averaged, and weighted the average on

337

 
 

Chapter 4

the basis of their uncertainties, because there is no apparent reason
to discount either study. For the estimation of the GIS contribution
only the Bamber et al. (2018) estimate is used, as there is no other
multi-method assessment available.

4.2.2.2.5 Contributions from water storage on land

Water is stored on land not only in the form of ice but snow, surface
water, soil moisture and groundwater. Temporal changes in land
water storage, defined as all forms of water stored on land excluding
land ice, contribute to observed changes in ocean mass and thus sea
level on annual to centennial time scales (Ddll et al., 2016; Reager
et al., 2016; Hamlington et al, 2017; Wada et al., 2017). They are
caused by both climate variability and direct human interventions,
at the multi-decadal to centennial time scales. Over the past century,
the main cause for land water storage changes are the groundwater
depletion and impoundment of water behind dams in reservoirs
(D6ll et al, 2016; Wada et al. 2016). While the rate of groundwater
depletion and thus its contribution to SLR increased during the 20th
century and up to today (Wada et al., 2016), its effect on sea level
was more than balanced by the increase in land water storage due to
dam construction between 1950 and 2000 (Wada et al., 2016). Since
about 2000, based on hydrological models, the combined effect of
both processes is a positive contribution to SLR (Wada et al., 2016).
Decreased water storage in lakes, wetlands and soils due to human
activities are less important for ocean mass changes (Wada et al.,
2016). Overall, the integrated effects of the direct human intervention
on land hydrology have reduced land water storage during the last
decade, increasing the rate of SLR by 0.15-0.24 mm yr (Wada
et al., 2016; Wada et al, 2017; Scanlon et al., 2018; WCRP Global
Sea Level Budget Group, 2018). Over periods of a few decades,
land water storage was affected significantly by climate variability
(Dieng et al, 2015a; Reager et al., 2016; Dieng et al, 2017). Net
land water storage change driven by both climate and direct human
interventions can be determined based on GRACE observations and
global hydrological modelling. They indicate different estimates of
the rate of SLR. Over the period 2002-2014 GRACE-based estimates
of the net land water storage (i.e., not including glaciers) show a
negative contribution to sea level (e.g., Scanlon et al., 2018) resulting
in the negative value after 2006 in Table 1while hydrological models
determined a slightly positive one. The reasons for this difference
between estimates are not elucidated. There is scientific consensus
that uncertainties of both net land water storage contribution to sea
level and its individual contributions remain high (WCRP Global Sea
Level Budget Group, 2018). The differences in estimates and the lack
of multiple consistent studies give fow confidence in the net land
water storage contribution to current SLR.

4.2.2.2.6 Budget of global mean sea level change

Drawing on previous sections, the budget of GMSL rise (Table 4.1,
Figure 4.5) is assessed with observations over 4 periods: 1901-1990
(which corresponds to the period in the 20th century that is prior
to the increase in ice sheet contributions to GMSL rise), 1970-2015
(when ocean observations are sufficiently accurate to estimate the
global ocean thermal expansion and when glacier mass balance
reconstructions start), 1993-2015 (when precise satellite altimetry is

338

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

available) and 2006-2015 (when GRACE data is available in addition
to satellite altimetry and when the Argo network reaches a near-global
coverage). The budget of GMSL rise is also assessed with sea level
contributions simulated by climate models over the same periods
(Table 4.1, Figure 4.5). The periods 1993-2015 and 2006-2015 are
only 23 and 10 years long respectively, short enough so that they can
be affected by internal climate variability. Therefore, it is not expected
that observations over these periods will be precisely reproduced by
climate model historical experiments. For the contribution from land
water storage, the estimated effect of direct human intervention
was used, neglecting climate-related variations until 2002 (Ngo-Duc
et al., 2005). From 2002 to 2015, total land water storage estimated
with GRACE was used. In general, historical simulations of climate
models end in 2005. Historical simulations were extended here to
2015 using the RCP8.5 scenario. This choice of RCP scenario is not
critical for the simulated sea level, as the different scenarios only
start to diverge significantly after the year 2030 (Church et al., 2013).

For 1993-2015 and 2006-2015, the observed GMSL rise is consistent
within uncertainties with the sum of the estimated observed
contributions (Table 4.1). Over the period 1993-2015 the two largest
terms are the ocean thermal expansion (accounting for 43% of the
observed GMSL rise) and the glacier mass loss (accounting for a further
20%). Compared to AR5, the extended observations corrected for the
TOPEX-A drift (see Section 4.2.2.1.2) allow us now to identify an
acceleration in the observed SLR over 1993-2015 and to attribute this
acceleration mainly to Greenland ice loss along with an acceleration in
Antarctic ice loss (Velicogna et al., 2014; Harig and Simons, 2015; Chen
etal., 2017; Dieng et al., 2017;Yiet al, 2017;see also Sections 4.2.2.2.2,
4.2.2.3.4, 3.3.1). Since 2006, land ice, collectively from glaciers and
the ice sheets has become the most important contributor to GMSL
rise over the thermal expansion with mountain glaciers contributing
20% and ice sheets 33% (see Table 4.1). Over the periods 1993-2015,
the sum of the observed sea level contributions is consistent with the
total observed sea level within uncertainties at monthly-scales (not
shown, e.g., Dieng et al., 2017). This is also true for the period 2006—
2015, when uncertainties are significantly smaller. This agreement
at monthly time scales represents a significant advance since the
ARS in physical understanding of the causes of past GMSL change.
It provides an improved basis for the evaluation of models. Given
these elements there is high confidence that the current observing
system is capable of resolving decadal to multidecadal changes
in GMSL and its components (with an uncertainty of <0.7 mm yr"
at decadal and longer time scales, see Table 4.1 and for example,
WCRP Global Sea Level Budget Group, 2018). However, despite this
advance since ARS there are still no comprehensive observations of
ocean thermal expansion below 2000 m, in regions covered by sea ice
and in marginal seas. The understanding of glacier mass loss can be
improved at regional scale and the understanding of the land water
storage contribution is still limited. Thus, for smaller changes in sea
level of the order of a few tenths of a mm yr” at decadal time scales
and shorter time scales there is medium confidence in the capability of
the current observing system to resolve them (e.g., WCRP Global Sea
Level Budget Group, 2018).

Before 1992, observations are not sufficient to confidently estimate
the ice sheet mass balance and before 1970, the space and time
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

sampling of ocean observations are not sufficient to estimate the
global ocean thermal expansion. For these reasons, it is difficult to
assess the closure of the GMSL rise budget over 1901-1990 and
1970-2015 (Church et al., 2013; Gregory et al., 2013; Jevrejeva et al,
2017; Meyssignac et al., 2017c; Slangen et al., 2017b; Parkes and
Marzeion, 2018). For the period 1970-2015, the thermal expansion
of the ocean represents 43% of the observed GMSL rise while the
glaciers’ contribution represents 22% (see Table 4.1). This result
indicates a slightly smaller contribution from glaciers than reported
by ARS. If the GIS contribution and the Antarctic SMB is added, then
the sum of the contributors to sea level is in agreement with the
low end observed SLR estimates over 1970-2015 (Frederikse et al.,
2018). This result suggests that the contribution of Antarctica ice
sheet dynamics to SLR has been small, if any, before the 1990s.

Since AR5, extended simulations along with recent findings in
observations and improved model estimates allow for a new more
robust, consistent and comprehensive comparison between sea level
estimates based on observations and climate model simulations
(e.g., Meyssignac et al., 2017c; Slangen et al., 2017b; Parkes and
Marzeion, 2018). Compared to AR5, the simulated thermal expansion
from climate models has improved with a new correction for the
volcanic activity (see Section 4.2.2.2.1). The glacier contribution from
glacier models forced with inputs from climate models is updated
with a new glacier inventory and improvements to the glacier mass
balance model (Marzeion et al, 2015). The simulated Greenland
SMB is estimated with a new regional SMB-component downscaling

S

Chapter 4

technique, which accounts for the regional variations in components
of the Greenland SMB (Noél et al., 2015; Meyssignac et al., 2017a).
In addition, an updated groundwater extraction contribution from
DOll et al. (2014) is now used for the land water storage contribution.

For the periods 1970-2015, 1993-2015 and 2006-2015 the
simulated contributions from thermal expansion, glaciers mass loss
and Greenland SMB explain respectively 84%, 81% and 77% of the
observed GMSL (see Table 4.1). For all these periods the residual is
consistent within uncertainty with the sum of the contribution from
land water storage and ice discharge from Greenland and Antarctica.
For each period the consistency is improved compared to AR5 (see
Table 4.1) although the uncertainty on the residual is slightly larger
because of a larger uncertainty in simulated Glaciers and Greenland
SMB contributions.

For the period 1901-1990 the simulated contributions from thermal
expansion, glaciers mass loss and Greenland SMB explain only 60%
of the observed GMSL and the residual is too large to be explained
by the sum of the contribution from land water storage and ice
discharge from Greenland and Antarctica. The gap can be explained
by a bias in the simulated Greenland SMB and glacier ice loss around
Greenland in the early 20th century (Slangen et al, 2017b). When
the glacier model and the Greenland SMB downscaling technique
are forced with observed climate from atmospheric reanalyses, rather
than the simulated climate from coupled climate models, simulated
SLR becomes consistent with the observed SLR (see the dashed blue

 

100

Pinatubo

   

Santa Maria

505

 

-50 4

Sea level change (mm)

-100 —8

150

 

90

805

Pinatubo
I

   

70

 

 

 

 

T T T
1960 1980 2000

T
1940

 

 

T T T T
1995 2000 2005 2010

1900
year year
Legend =—— CMIP5 ensemble mean enn Ray and Douglas, 2011 ssse= Dangendorf et al., 2017
=== CMIP5 ensemble mean corr «asae Jevrejeva et al., 2014 —= Legeais et al., 2018
seams Church et al., 2011 seen Hay et al., 2015 =—— Watson et al., 2015

Figure 4.5 | Comparison of simulated (by coupled climate models as in Section 4.4.2.6) and observed global mean sea level change (GMSL) since 1901 (a) and since
1993 (b). The average estimate of 12 Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) climate model simulations is shown in blue with the 5-95% uncertainty
range shaded in blue and calculated according to the procedures in Church et al. (2013). The average of the 12 model estimates corrected for the bias in glaciers mass loss
and Greenland surface mass balance (SMB) over 1900-1940 (see Section 4.2.2.2.6) is shown in dashed blue. The estimates from tide gauge reconstructions is shown in
other colours in panel a), with the 5-95% uncertainty range shaded in grey. The satellite altimetry observations from Legeais et al. (2018) is shown in black in panel b).
GMSL from altimetry corrected for the TOPEX-A drift (Watson et al, 2015) in orange as well as the tide gauge reconstruction. The 5-95% uncertainty range is shaded in
orange (Ablain et al, 2015). All curves in (a) represent anomalies in sea level with respect to the period 1986-2005 (ie. with zero time-mean over the period 1986-2005)
in order to be consistent with sea level projections in Section 4.2.3. Vertical lines indicate the occurrence of major volcanic eruptions, which cause temporary drops in

GMSL. Updated from Slangen et al. (201 7b).

339

 
 

Chapter 4

line on Figure 4.5). This is because atmospheric reanalyses show an
increase in air temperatures in and around Greenland over the period
1900-1940, which lead to increased melt in Greenland (Bjork et al.,
2012; Fettweis et al., 2017) and surrounding glaciers in the first half
of the 20th century. This increase in air temperature over 1900-1940
is not reproduced by climate models (Slangen et al., 2017b). It may
be because this increase in air temperature was due to internal
climate variability on temporal and spatial scales that cannot be
precisely reproduced by climate models. It may also be due to a bias
in atmospheric circulation in climate models (Fettweis et al, 2017),
or an issue with the spatial pattern of the historical aerosol forcing.

In summary, the agreement between climate model simulations
and observations of the global thermal expansion, glacier mass loss
and Greenland SMB has improved compared to ARS for periods
starting after 1970. However, for periods prior to 1970, significant
discrepancies between climate models and observations arise
from the inability of climate models to reproduce some observed
regional changes in glacier and GIS SMB around the southern tip of
Greenland. It is not clear whether this bias in climate models is due to
the internal variability of the climate system or deficiencies in climate
models. For this reason, there is still medium confidence in the ability
of climate models to simulate past and future changes in glaciers
mass loss and Greenland SMB.

4.2.2.3. Regional Sea Level Changes During
the Instrumental Period

Sea level does not rise uniformly. Observations from tide gauges
and satellite altimetry (Figure 4.6) indicate that sea level shows
substantial regional variability at decadal to multi-decadal time
scales (eg., Carson et al., 2017; Hamlington et al, 2018). These
regional changes are essentially due to changing winds, air-sea heat
and freshwater fluxes, atmospheric pressure loading and the addition
of melting ice into the ocean, which alters the ocean circulation
(Stammer et al., 2013; Forget and Ponte, 2015; Meyssignac et al.,
2017b). The addition of water into the ocean also change the geoid,
alter the rotation of the Earth and deform the ocean floor which in
turn change sea level (e.g., Tamisiea, 2011; Stammer et al., 2013).

Sea level is rising in all ocean basins (virtually certain; Legeais et al.
2018). Part of this regional sea level rise is due to global sea level rise
of which a majority is attributable to anthropogenic greenhouse gas
emissions (high confidence; Slangen et al. 2016). The remaining part
of the regional sea-level rise in ocean basins is a combination of the
response to anthropogenic GHG emissions and internal variability
(eg., Stammer et al. 2013; medium confidence).

In the open ocean, the spatial variability and trends in sea level
observed during the recent altimetry era or reconstructed over the
previous decades are dominated by the thermal expansion of the
ocean. In shallow shelf seas and at high latitudes (>60°N and <55°S),
the effect of dynamic mass redistribution becomes important. At
local scale, salinity changes can also generate sizeable changes in the
ocean density similar to thermal expansion and lead to significant
variability in sea level (Forget and Ponte, 2015; Meyssignac et al.,
2017b). On global average, the heat and freshwater fluxes from the

340

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

atmosphere into the ocean are responsible for the total heat that
enters the ocean and for the associated GMSL rise. At regional scale
and local scale, both the ocean transport divergences caused by wind
stress anomalies and the spatial variability in atmospheric heat fluxes
are responsible for the spatial variability in thermal expansion and
thus for most of the regional sea level departures around the GMSL
rise (e.g., Stammer et al., 2013; Forget and Ponte, 2015).

Over the Pacific, the surface wind anomalies responsible for the
sea level spatio-temporal variability are associated with the ENSO,
Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) and North Pacific Gyre Oscillation
modes (Hamlington et al., 2013; Moon et al., 2013; Palanisamy et al.,
2015; Han et al., 2017). In the Indian Ocean they are associated with
the ENSO and Indian Ocean Dipole (IOD) modes (Nidheesh et al.,
2013; Han et al., 2014; Thompson et al, 2016; Han et al., 2017). In
particular, the PDO is responsible for most of the intensified SLR that
has been observed in the western tropical Pacific Ocean since the
1990s (Moon et al., 2013; Han et al., 2014; Thompson and Mitchum,
2014). Several studies suggested that in addition to the PDO signal,
warming of the tropical Indian and Atlantic Oceans enhanced surface
easterly trade winds and thus also contributes to the intensified SLR
in the western tropical Pacific (England et al., 2014; Hamlington et al.,
2014; McGregor et al., 2014).

Over the Atlantic, the regional sea level variability at interannual to
multi-decadal time scales, is generated by surface wind anomalies
and heat fluxes associated with the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO;
Han et al, 2017) and also by ocean heat transport due to changes
in the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC; McCarthy
et al., 2015). Both mechanisms are not independent as heat fluxes
and wind stress anomalies associated with NAO can induce changes
in the AMOC (Schloesser et al., 2014; Yeager and Danabasoglu,
2014). In the Southern Ocean, the sea level variability is dominated
by the SAM influence in particular in the Indian and Pacific sectors.
The Southern Annular Mode (SAM) influence becomes weaker
equator-wards in these sectors while the influence of PDO, ENSO and
IOD increases (Frankcombe et al., 2015). In the southern ocean, the
zonal asymmetry in westerly winds associated to the SAM, generates
convergent and divergent transport in the Antarctic Circumpolar
Current which may have contributed to the regional asymmetry of
decadal sea level variations during most of the twentieth century
(Thompson and Mitchum, 2014).

As for GMSL, net regional sea level changes can be estimated from
a combination of the various contributions to sea level change. The
contributions from dynamic sea level, atmospheric loading, glacier
mass changes and ice sheet SMB can be derived from CMIP5 climate
model outputs either directly or through downscaling techniques
(Perrette et al, 2013; Kopp et al., 2014; Slangen et al., 2014a;
Bilbao et al., 2015; Carson et al., 2016; Meyssignac et al., 2017a).
The contributions from groundwater depletion, reservoir storage
and dynamic ice sheet mass changes are not simulated by coupled
climate models over the 20th century and have to be estimated
from observations. The sum of all contributions, including the GIA
contribution, provides a modelled estimate of the 20th century net
regional sea level changes that can be compared with observations
from satellite altimetry and tide-gauge records (see Figure 4.6).
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

In terms of interannual to multi-decadal variability, there is a
general agreement between the simulated regional sea level and
tide gauge records, over the period 1900-2015 (see inset figures in
Figure 4.6). The relatively large, short-term oscillations in observed
sea level (black lines in insets in Figure 4.6), which are due to the
natural internal climate variability, are included in general within the
modelled internal variability of the climate system represented by
the blue shaded area (5-95% uncertainty). But, as for GMSL, climate
models tend to systematically underestimate the observed sea level
trends from tide gauge records, particularly in the first half of the
20th century. This underestimation is explained by a bias identified in
modelled Greenland SMB, and glacier ice loss around Greenland in the
early 20th century (see Section 4.2.2.2.6; Slangen et al, 2017b). The
correction of this bias improves the agreement between the spatial
variability in sea level trends from observations and from climate
models (see Figure 4.6). Climate models indicate that the spatial
variability in sea level trends observed by tide-gauge records over the
20th century is dominated by the GIA contribution and the thermal
expansion contribution over 1900-2015. Locally all contributions
to sea level changes are important as any contribution can cause

Relative sea level change (mm)

(a) New York (b) Venice

2007 Adjusted to remove non-GlA ie 4 b
vertical land movement L 4 L

 

  
   

 

(c) Cuxhaven (d) Burullus (Alexandria)

 

 

 

(e) Lusi (Shanghai) (f} Lautoka (Fiji)

 

Chapter 4

significant local deviations. Around India for example, groundwater
depletion is responsible for the low 20th century SLR (because the
removal of groundwater mass generated a local decrease in geoid
that made local SLR slower; Meyssignac et al., 2017c).

These results show the ability of models to reproduce the major 20th
century regional sea level changes due to GIA, thermal expansion,
glacier mass loss and ice sheet SMB. This is tangible progress since
AR5. But some doubts remain regarding the ability of climate models
to reproduce local variations such as the glaciers and the Greenland
SMB contributions to sea level in the region around the southern
tip of Greenland (Slangen et al., 2017b) or such as the thermal
expansion in some eddy active regions (Sérazin et al., 2016). Because
of these doubts there is still medium confidence in climate models
to project future regional sea level changes associated with thermal
expansion, glacier mass loss and ice sheet SMB. Coupled climate
models have not simulated the other contributions to 20th century
sea level, including the growing ice sheet dynamical contribution and
land water storage changes.

-300 -200 -100 0 100 200 300
Relative sea level (mm)

(g) Zanzibar (h) Papeete (Tahiti)

 

200-7 Adjusted to remove non-GlA F 4 L
4004 vertical land movement L 4
0 aa henaidgbey eet r 4
Lave

~1004 rF ol [
-2007 tr [

an abalhacesacoa ete
oneansnnna tir” i ;

tz L

 

(i) Buenos Aires (j) Guam

(k) Balboa (Panama City) (l) Sydney

 

2004 t Ayr

1005 r 1

 

 

 

 

4 Adjusted to remove non-GlA a 4 |
J vertical land movement

 

 

 

 

 

 

04 tr 6 2 t
1007 bt fear" t L
-2004 tT 64 t 1 t 1 t
1900 1950 2000 1900 1950 2000 1900 1950 2000 1900 1900 1900
year year year year

Legend | — Observed — Model estimates

---- Model estimates corrected for the bias

 

Figure 4.6 | 20th century simulated regional sea level changes by coupled climate models and comparison with a selection of local tide gauge time series. In the upper
left corner: map of changes in simulated relative sea level (RSL) for the period 1901-1920 to 1996-2015 estimated from climate model outputs. Insets: Observed RSL
changes (black lines) from selected tide gauge stations for the period 1900-2015. For comparison, the estimate of the simulated RSL change at the tide gauge station is
also shown (blue plain line for the model estimates and blue dashed line for the model estimates corrected for the bias in glaciers mass loss and Greenland surface mass
balance (SMB) over 1900-1940, see Section 4.2.2.2.6). The relatively large, short-term oscillations in observed local sea level (black lines) are due to the natural internal
climate variability. For Mediterranean tide gauges, that is, Venice and Alexandria, the local simulated sea level has been computed with the simulated sea level in the
Atlantic ocean at the entrance of the strait of Gibraltar following (Adloff et al., 2018). Tide gauge records have been corrected for vertical land motion (VLM) not associated
with GIA where available, that is, for New York, Balboa and Lusi. Updated from Meyssignac et al. (201 7b) to mimic RSL as good as possible.

341
 

Chapter 4

4.2.2.4 Local Coastal Sea Level

Since the local coastal sea level (scale ~10 km) is affected by global,
regional (scale ~100 km) and coastal scale features and processes like
anthropogenic subsidence, it may differ substantially from the regional
sea level. At the coast, the sea level change is additionally affected
by wave run up, tidal level, wind forcing, sea level pressure (SLP), the
dominant modes of climate variability, seasonal climatic periodicities,
mesoscale eddies, changes in river flow, as well as anthropogenic
subsidence (see also Box 4.1). These local contributions, combined
with sea level events generated by storm surges and tides result in
anomalous conditions (ESL) which last for a short time in contrast
to the gradual increase over time from for instance ice mass loss.
Flood risk due to ESL is exacerbated due to its interaction with RSL
and hence physical vulnerability assessments combine uncertainties
around ESL and RSL, both in terms of contemporary assessments and
future projections (Little et al, 2015b; Vousdoukas, 2016; Vousdoukas
et al., 2016; Wahl et al., 2017). Changes in mean sea level have been
dealt with in previous sections (e.g., Section 4.2.2.2.6). Here the
focus is on some of the components of ESL that have been assessed
in combination with changes in RSL. Church et al. (2013) concluded
that change in sea level extremes is very likely to be caused by a
RSL increase, and that storminess and surges will contribute towards
these extremes; however, it was noted that there was /ow confidence
in region-specific projections as there was only a limited number of
studies with a poor geographical coverage available.

Recent advances in statistical and dynamical modelling of wave
effects at the coast, storm surges and inundation risk have reduced
the uncertainties around the inundation risks at the coast (Vousdoukas
et al., 2016; Vitousek et al., 2017; Melet et al., 2018; Vousdoukas et al.,
2018c) and assessments of the resulting highly resolved coastal sea
levels are now emerging (Cid et al., 2017; Muis et al., 2017; Wahl
et al., 2017). This progress was facilitated due to the availability
of, for example, the Global Extreme Sea Level Analysis (GESLA-2;
Woodworth et al., 2016) high-frequency (hourly) datasets, advances
in the Coordinated Ocean Wave Climate Project (COWCLIP; Hemer
et al, 2013), coastal altimetry datasets (Cipollini et al., 2017), and
the Global Tide and Surge Reanalysis (GTSR; Muis et al, 2016), while
new analyses of datasets that have been available since before the
publication of AR5 have continued (e.g., PSML; Holgate et al., 2012).

Although ESL is experienced episodically by definition, Marcos et al.
(2015) examined the long-term behaviour of storm surge models and
detected decadal and multidecadal variations in storm surge that are
not related to changes in RSL. They found that, although 82% of their
observed time series showed synchronous patterns at regional scales,
the pattern tended to be non-linear, implying that it would be difficult
to infer future behaviour unless the physical basis for the responses
was understood. An analysis of the relative contributions of SLR and
ESL due to storminess showed that in the US Pacific northwest since
the early 1980s, increases in wave height and period have had a larger
effect on coastal flooding and erosion than RSL (Ruggiero, 2012)
since the early 1980s. This is also true in other regions distributed
over the entire globe (Melet et al., 2016; Melet et al, 2018). Changes
since 1990 in the sea level harmonics and seasonal phases and
amplitudes of the wave period and significant wave height were

342

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

found for the Gulf of Mexico coast and along the US east coast (Wahl
et al., 2014; Wahl and Plant, 2015). These authors found that high
waters have increased twice as much as one would expect from
long-term SLR alone, because of additional changes in the seasonal
cycle, yielding a 30% increase in risk of flooding. Such effects are
likely to be highly dependent on the local conditions. For example,
using WAVEWATCH III, TOPEX/Poseidon altimetry tide model data
and atmospheric forcing physically downscaled using Delft3D-WAVE
and Delft3D-FLOW in what they call the Coastal Storm Modeling
System (CoSMoS), Vitousek et al. (2017) were able to detect local
inundation hazards (at a scale of hundreds of metres) across regions
along the Californian coast. Similarly, Castrucci and Tahvildari (2018)
simulated the impact of SLR along the Mid-Atlantic region in the
USA. A study for the Maldives shows that the contribution of wave
setup is essential to estimate flood risks (Wadey et al., 2017).

In deltas, the local sea level can be dominated by anthropogenic
subsidence more than by the processes outlined above. It is often
a primary driver of elevated local SLR and increased flood hazards
in those regions. This is particularly true for deltaic systems, where
fertile soils, low-relief topography, freshwater access, and strategic
ports have encouraged the development of many of the world’s
most densely populated coastlines and urban centres. For example,
globally, one in fourteen humans resides in mid-to-low latitude
deltas (Day et al., 2016). Although in these areas RSL is dominated
by anthropogenic subsidence, climate effects need to be included for
estimating risks associated with RSL (Syvitski et al, 2009).

Deltas are formed by the accumulation of unconsolidated river born
sediments and porous organic material, both of which are particularly
prone to compaction. It is the compaction which causes a drop in
land elevation that increases the rate of local SLR above what would
be observed along a static coastline or one where only climatological
forced processes control the RSL. Under stable deltaic conditions,
the accumulation of fluvially-sourced surficial sediment and organic
matter offsets this natural subsidence (Syvitski and Saito, 2007);
however, in many cases this natural process of delta construction has
been disturbed by reductions in fluvial sediment supply via upstream
dams and fluvial channelisation (Vérdésmarty et al., 2003; Syvitski
and Saito, 2007; Syvitski et al, 2009; Luo et al., 2017). Further,
the extraction of fluids and gas that fill the pore space of deltaic
sediments and provide support for overlying material has significantly
increased the rate of compaction and resultant anthropogenic
subsidence along many populated deltas (Higgins, 2016). In addition,
Nicholls (2011) pointed to anthropogenic subsidence by the weight
of buildings in megacities in South-East Asia.

Average natural and anthropogenic subsidence rates of 6-9 mm yr!
are reported for the highly populated areas of Ganges-Brahmaputra-
Meghna delta in the urban centres of Kolkata and Dhaka (Brown and
Nicholls, 2015). A fraction of these subsidence rates might be caused by
long-term processes of increased sediment loading during the Holocene
resulting from changes in the monsoon system (Karpytchev et al., 2018).
Subsidence rates are expected to decrease in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-
Meghna delta in the near future due to planned dam projects and an
estimated 21% drop in resulting sediment supply (Tessler et al., 2018).
Observations of enhanced natural and anthropogenic subsidence
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

on the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna are common to most heavily
populated deltaic systems. Coastal mega-cities that have been
particularly prone to human-enhanced subsidence include Bangkok,
Ho Chi Minh city (Vachaud et al., 2018), Jakarta, Manila, New Orleans,
West Netherlands and Shanghai (Yin et al, 2013; Cheng et al., 2018).
On a global scale, observed rates of modern deltaic anthropogenic
subsidence range from 6-100 mm yr" (Bucx et al, 2015; Higgins,
2016). Rates of recent deltaic subsidence over the last few decades
have been at least twice the 3 mm yr rate of GMSL rise observed
over this same interval (Higgins, 2016; Tessler et al., 2018). Numerical
models that have reproduced these observed rates of anthropogenic
deltaic subsidence by considering human-induced compaction and
reduced sediment supply, support anthropogenic causes for elevated
rates of subsidence (Tessler et al., 2018).

In summary, ESL interacts with RSL rise including anthropogenic
subsidence in many vulnerable areas (see Box 4.1). Therefore, it is
concluded with high confidence that the inclusion of local processes
(wave effects, storm surges, tides, erosion, sedimentation and
compaction) is essential to estimate local, relative and changes in ESL
events. Although the effect of anthropogenic subsidence may be very
large locally, it is not accounted for in the projection sections of this
chapter as no global data sets are available which are consistent with
RCP scenarios, and because the scale at which these processes take
place is often smaller than the spatial scale used in climate models.
4.2.2.5 Attribution of Sea Level Change
to Anthropogenic Forcing

Bindoff et al. (2013) concluded that it is very /ikely that there has been
a substantial contribution to ocean heat content from anthropogenic
forcing (i.e., anthropogenic greenhouse gases, anthropogenic aerosols
and land use change) since the 1970s, that it is /ikely that loss of land
ice is partly caused by anthropogenic forcing, and that as a result, it is
very likely that there is an anthropogenic contribution to the observed
trend in GMSL rise since 1970. However, these conclusions were
based on the understanding of the responsible physical processes,
since formal attribution studies dedicated to quantifying the effect of
individual external forcings were not available for GMSLR. Since AR5,
such formal studies have attributed changes in individual components
of sea level change (i.¢., thermosteric sea level change and glacier
mass loss), and in the total GMSL, to anthropogenic forcing.

4.2.2.5.1 Attribution of individual components of sea level change
to anthropogenic forcing

Marcos and Amores (2014) found that during the period
1970-2005, 87% (95% confidence interval: 72-100%) of the
observed thermosteric SLR in the upper 700 m of the ocean was
anthropogenic. Slangen et al. (2014b) included the full ocean depth
in their analysis. They concluded that a combination of anthropogenic
and natural forcing is necessary to explain the temporal evolution
of observed global mean thermosteric sea level change during the
period 1957-2005. Anthropogenic forcing was responsible for the
amplitude of observed thermosteric sea level change, while natural
forcing caused the forced variability of observations. Observations
could best be reproduced by scaling the patterns from ‘natural-only’

Chapter 4

forcing experiments by using a factor of 0.70 + 0.30 (2 standard
deviations of the CMIP5 ensemble subset used), indicating a
potential overestimation of forced variability in the CMIP5 ensemble.
Patterns from the ‘anthropogenic-only’ forcing experiments needed
to be scaled by a factor of 1.08 + 0.13 (2 standard deviations of the
CMIP5 ensemble subset used), indicating a realistic response of the
CMIP5 ensemble to anthropogenic forcing.

For the glacier contribution to GMSL, Marzeion et al. (2014) concluded
that while natural climate forcing and long-term adjustment of the
glaciers to the end of the preceding Little Ice Age lead to continuous
glacier mass loss throughout the simulation period of 1851-2010, the
observed rates of glacier mass loss since 1990 can only be explained
by including anthropogenic forcing. During the period 1851-2010,
only 25 + 35% of global glacier mass loss can be attributed to
anthropogenic forcing, but 69 + 24% during the period 1991-2010
(see Section 2.2.3 for a more detailed discussion of attribution of
glacier mass change on regional scales).

There is medium confidence in evidence linking GIS mass loss to
anthropogenic climate change, and fow confidence in the evidence
that AIS mass balance can be attributed to anthropogenic forcing (see
Section 3.3.1.6 for a detailed discussion). The effects of groundwater
depletion and reservoir impoundment on sea level change are
anthropogenic by definition (e.g., Wada et al., 2012).

4.2.2.5.2 Attribution of global mean sea level change
to anthropogenic forcing

By estimating a probabilistic upper range of long-term persistent
natural sea level variability, Dangendorf et al. (2015) detected a
fraction of observed sea level change that is unexplained by natural
variability and concluded by inference that it is virtually certain
that at least 45% of the observed increase in GMSL since 1900 is
attributable to anthropogenic forcing. Similarly, Becker et al. (2014)
provided statistical evidence that the observed sea level trend,
both in the global mean and at selected tide gauge locations, is not
consistent with unforced, internal variability. They inferred that more
than half of the observed GMSL trend during the 20th century is
attributable to anthropogenic forcing.

Slangen et al. (2016) reconstructed GMSL from 1900 to 2005 based
on CMIP5 model simulations separating individual components
of radiative climate forcing and combining the contributions of
thermosteric sea level change with glacier and ice sheet mass loss.
They found that the naturally caused sea level change, including the
long-term adjustment of sea level to climate change preceding 1900,
caused 67 + 23% of observed change from 1900 to 1950, but only
9 + 18% between 1970 and 2005. Anthropogenic forcing was found
to have caused 15 + 55% of observed sea level change during 1900-
1950, but 69 + 31% during 1970-2005. The sum of all contributions
explains only 74 + 22% of observed GMSL change during the period
1900-2005 considering the mean of the reconstructions of Church
and White (2011), Ray and Douglas (2011), Jevrejeva et al. (2014b)
and Hay et al. (2015). However, the budget could be closed taking
into contribution of glaciers that are missing from the global glacier

343

 
 

Chapter 4

inventory or have already melted (Parkes and Marzeion, 2018) which
were not considered in Slangen et al. (2016).

Based on these multiple lines of evidence, there is high confidence
that anthropogenic forcing very likely is the dominant cause of
observed GMSL rise since 1970.

4.2.3 Projections of Sea Level Change

As a consequence of climate change, the global and regional mean
sea level will change. Coupled climate models are used to make
projections of the climate changes and the associated SLR. Results
from the CMIP5 model archive used for AR5 provide information
on expected changes in the oceans and on the evolution of climate,
glaciers and ice sheets. New estimates from CMIP6 are not yet
available and will be discussed in the IPCC 6th Assessment Report
(AR6), hence only a partly updated projection can be presented here.

Coupled climate models can be applied on century time scales, to
provide estimates of the steric (temperature and salinity effects
on sea water density) and ocean dynamical (ocean circulation)
components of sea level change, both globally and regionally.
However, the glacier and ice sheet component are calculated off-line
based on temperature and precipitation changes. In the AR5 report,
changes in the SMB of glaciers and ice sheet were calculated
from the global surface air temperature. In addition, GCMs also
resolve climate variability related to changes in precipitation and
evaporation. These changes are used to calculate short duration sea
level changes (Cazenave and Cozannet, 2014; Hamlington et al.,
2017). With various degrees of success those models capture ENSO,
PDO and other modes of variability (e.g., Yin et al., 2009; Zhang
and Church, 2012), which affect sea level through redistributions
of energy and salt in the ocean on slightly longer time scales.
Off-line temperature and precipitation fields can be dynamically or
statistically downscaled to match the high spatial resolution required
for ice sheets and glaciers, but serious limitations remain. This
deficiency limits adequate representation of potentially important
feedbacks between changes in ice sheet geometry and climate, for
example through fresh water and iceberg production that impact on
ocean circulation and sea ice, which can have global consequences
(Lenaerts et al, 2016; Donat-Magnin et al., 2017). Another limitation
is the lack of coupling with the solid Earth which controls the ice
sheet evolution (Whitehouse et al., 2019). Dynamics of the interaction
of ice streams with bedrock and till at the ice base remain difficult
to model due to lack of direct observations. Nevertheless, several
new ice sheet models have been generated over the last few years,
particularly for Antarctica (Section 4.2.3.1) focusing on the dynamic
contribution of the ice sheet to sea level change, which remains the
key uncertainty in future projections (Church et al., 2013), particularly
beyond 2050 (Kopp et al., 2014; Nauels et al., 2017b; Slangen et al.,
2017a; Horton et al., 2018).

Information beyond that provided by climate models is needed
to describe local and RSL changes. Geodynamic models are used to
calculate RSL changes due to changes in ice mass in the past and future.
This includes solid Earth deformation, gravitational and rotational

344

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

changes, as ice and water are redistributed around the globe. Input
for those models is provided by the mass changes following from
the off-line land ice models, time series of terrestrial water mass
changes which typically require climate input, and reconstruction of
past ice sheet changes over the last glacial cycle provided by coupled
ice-Earth models (de Boer et al., 2017). Combining these different
models leads to projections of RSL (Section 4.2.3.2).

At the local spatial scales of specific cities, islands and stretches of
coastlines, hydrodynamical models (Section 4.2.3.3) and knowledge
about anthropogenic subsidence are necessary to analyse the
impacts of highly variable processes leading to ESL, such as tropical
cyclone-driven storm surges. These hydrodynamical models are
capable of providing statistics on the variability or the change
in variability of the water level required for flood risk calculations
at specific locations and at spatial scales of less than 1 km. The
models also rely on input from climate models, like temperature,
precipitation, wind regime, and storm tracks (Colbert et al., 2013;
Garner et al., 2017).

In summary, climate models play an important role at the various
stages of projections in providing, together with emission scenarios,
geodynamic, ice-dynamic and hydrodynamic models, the required
information for hazard estimation for coasts and low-lying islands.
This report relies on results of the CMIP5 model runs.

4.2.3.1 Contribution of Ice Sheets to GMSL

4.2.3.1.1 Greenland

The GIS is currently losing mass at roughly twice the pace of the
AIS (see Chapter 3 and Table 4.1). About 60% of the mass loss
between 1991 and 2015 has been attributed to increasingly negative
SMB from surface melt and runoff on the lower elevations of the
ice sheet margin. Ice dynamical changes and increased discharge
of marine-terminating glaciers account for the remaining 40% of
mass loss (Csatho et al., 2014; Enderlin, 2014; van den Broeke et al.,
2016). The ability of firn on Greenland to retain meltwater until it
refreezes has diminished markedly since the late 1990s, especially
in lower elevations and on peripheral ice caps (Noél et al., 2017).
Patterns of surface melt on Greenland are highly dependent on
regional atmospheric patterns (Bevis et al., 2019), adding uncertainty
to future projections of SMB. Melt-albedo feedbacks associated with
darkening of the ice surface from ponded water, changes in snow and
firn properties, and accumulation of impurities are also important,
because they can strongly enhance surface melt (Tedesco et al., 2016;
Ryan et al., 2018; Trusel et al., 2018; Ryan et al., 2019). These processes
are not fully captured by most Greenland-scale models which is an
important deficiency, because surface processes tend to dominate
uncertainty in future GIS model projections (e.g., Edwards et al.,
2014; Aschwanden et al., 2019). Increases in meltwater and changes
in the basal hydrologic regime, once thought to have a possible
destabilising effect on the ice sheet (Zwally et al., 2002), have been
linked with recent reductions in ice velocity in western Greenland. On
decadal time scales the effect of meltwater on ice dynamics are now
assessed to be small (van de Wal et al., 2015; Flowers, 2018), which
is supported by ice sheet model experiments (Shannon et al., 2013).
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

In sum, uncertain climate projections (Edwards et al., 2014), albedo
evolution, uncertainties around meltwater buffering by firn, complex
processes linking surface, englacial and basal hydrology with ice
dynamics (Goelzer et al., 2013; Stevens et al., 2016; Noél et al.,
2017; Hempelmann et al., 2018) and meltwater induced melting
at marine-terminating ice fronts (Chauché et al, 2014), and coarse
spatial model resolution (Pattyn et al, 2018), all continue to provide
substantial challenges for ice sheet and SMB models.

Greenland-scale ice sheet modelling since AR5 (Edwards et al.,
2014; Furst et al., 2015; Vizcaino et al, 2015; Calov et al., 2018;
Golledge et al., 2019; Aschwanden et al., 2019) has built upon earlier
work by coupling the ice models with regional climate models and
using multiple climate and ice sheet models within single studies
(Edwards et al., 2014). Recent modelling studies use higher-order
representations of ice flow (First et al., 2015), include more explicit
representations of ice sheet processes including subglacial hydrology
(Calov et al., 2018), run the models at higher resolution and with
updated boundary conditions (Aschwanden et al., 2019), and account
for two-way coupling between the ice sheet and the global ocean
(Vizcaino et al, 2015; Golledge et al., 2019). Among these studies,
Furst et al. (2015), Vizcaino et al. (2015), and Aschwanden et al.
(2019) provide projections following RCP2.6, RCP4.5, and RCP8.5
emissions scenarios. Calov et al. (2018) and Golledge et al. (2019)
did not consider RCP2.6. Edwards et al. (2014) used the Special
Report on Emissions Scenarios (SRES) A1B scenario which isn’t
directly comparable to the other studies assessed here, but they do
provide a rigorous analysis of uncertainty contributed by different
climate forcings, varying simplifications of ice flow equations and
height-SMB feedbacks.

Fiirst et al. (2015) used ten different CMIP5 Atmosphere-Ocean
General Circulation Model (AOGCM) simulations to provide offline
SMB and ocean forcing for their Greenland-wide ice sheet model,
accounting for influences of warming subsurface ocean temperatures
and basal lubrication on ice dynamics. In their RCP8.5 ensemble, they
found a GIS contribution to GMSL in 2100 of 10.15 cm + 3.24 cm.
Similarly, Calov et al. (2018) found a range of GMSL contributions
between 4.6-13 cm, depending on which CMIP5 GCM is used to
force their regional climate model to produce SMB forcing. The wide
range of RCP8.5 results in these studies highlights the substantial

Chapter 4

climate-driven uncertainty in 21st century projections of the GIS
as emphasised by Edwards et al. (2014). It was found that central
estimates and ranges for RCP8.5 simulated by Fiirst et al. (2015), Calov
et al. (2018), and Golledge et al. (2019) are in reasonable agreement
with previous multi-model results (Bindschadler et al., 2013) and
the assessment of AR5 (Church et al., 2013), which reported a fikely
RCP8.5 range of Greenland’s contribution to GMSL between 7-21 cm
by 2100 (Table 4.2.). The GIS simulations provided by Vizcaino et al.
(2015), using a relatively course-resolution ice model (10 km) with
SMB forcing provided by a single GCM, estimate much less ice loss
than other recent studies. Their GMSL projections (Vizcaino et al.,
2015) also fall below the /ikely range of ARS estimates. In contrast,
the study by Aschwanden et al. (2019) shows a significantly higher
contribution to GMSL than the other studies, especially under RCP8.5
and beyond 2100 (see 4.2.3.5). This may be due to their SMB forcing,
which is based on spatially uniform warming derived from future
CMIP5 GCM climatologies averaged over the entire Greenland region.
As noted by earlier work (¢.g., Van de Wal and Wild, 2001; Gregory
and Huybrechts, 2006), this approach can overestimate melt rates
in the ablation zone, which could account for their higher projected
ice loss. It is noted that the process-based estimates of future GMSL
rise from Greenland found in Aschwanden et al. (2019) are closest
to those from an updated, structured judgement of glaciological
and modelling experts (Bamber et al., 2019). Calculations from the
expert elicitation (Bamber et al., 2019) result in higher estimates
of Greenland ice loss than any of the process-based studies, with a
mean and standard deviation of 33 + 30 cm and a 17-83% range
of 10-60 cm by 2100, following a climate scenario comparable to
RCP8.5. The combination of the new process-based studies produces
central estimates (Table 4.2) consistent with the /ikely ranges for
Greenland’s contribution to GMSL in 2100 assessed by ARS.

Complimentary to the ice sheet scale simulations discussed above,
Nick et al. (2013) used detailed flowline models of four Greenland
outlet glaciers (Petermann, Kangerdlugssuaq, Jakobshavn_ Isbree,
and Helheim) to estimate a dynamical contribution to sea level in
an RCP8.5 scenario of 11.3-17.5 mm by 2100, and 29-49 mm, by
2200. This demonstrates the limited potential of Greenland outlet
glaciers alone to drive GMSL rise. Greenland-wide modelling studies
(Table 4.2) consistently find a dominant role of runoff relative to
dynamic discharge of ice loss, and a long-term reduction in the rate of

Table 4.2 | Estimates of the Greenland Ice Sheet (GIS) contribution to Global Mean Sea Level (GMSL; cm) in 2100 reported by process-based modelling studies including
the effects of both surface mass balance (SMB) and ice dynamics published since the IPCC 5th Assessment Report (AR5). Only model results including elevation-SMB
feedback are shown. All values are reported as the contribution to GMSL in 2100 relative to 2000, with the exception of Aschwanden et al. (2019) who report values
relative to 2008. The median estimate for comparison with ARS is based on the average of the three simulations in Calov et al. (2018) using different General Climate
Models (GCMs), combined with the central estimates from the other studies. RMSD (Flirst et al., 2015) is the Root Mean Squared Deviation from their ensemble median.
The range reported by Aschwanden et al (2019) refers to the 16-84% interval of a 500 member ensemble with varying model physical parameters. RCP is Representative

Concentration Pathway.

Aschwanden et al. (2019)
Calov et al. (2018)

Ftirst et al. (2015)
Golledge et al. (2019)
Vizcaino et al. (2015)
Process based median

IPCC ARS Table 13.5

8-23
1.9-5.6
5.5 + 1.86

 

14-33
4.6-13.0
10.2 + 3.24

16-84% range

Range of three GCMs

RMSD from ensemble median

10.9 11.2
3.4 5.8
78 11.9

4-13 7-21

likely range

345

 
 

Chapter 4

>2500
2000
1500
1000

Bedrock | 50°
elevation

-500
(m)
~1000

-1500
-2000
<-2500

Deyn
Ena

 

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

0 4,000

Eco hairs 1}
Kilometers

Figure 4.7 | Bedrock topography below the existing ice sheets in Greenland (Morlighem et al, 2017) and Antarctica (right) (Fretwell et al, 2013). Horizontal scales are
not the same in both panels. Note the deep subglacial basins in West Antarctica and the East Antarctic margin. The ice above floatation in these areas is equivalent to

>20 m of Global Mean Sea Level (GMSL).

dynamic ice discharge to the ocean as the ice sheet margin thins and
the termini of outlet glaciers retreat from the coast (Goelzer et al.,
2013; Lipscomb et al., 2013). Greenland’s bedrock geography and the
limited, direct access of thick interior ice to the ocean ultimately limits
the potential pace of GMSL rise from the GIS. Figure 4.7 illustrates
a fundamental difference between Greenland and Antarctica. In
Greenland, most of the bedrock at the ice sheet margin is above sea
level (land terminating), with relatively narrow (generally <10 km
wide) outlet glaciers reaching the ocean. In contrast, Antarctica
has extensive areas with subglacial bedrock below sea level, and
thick marine-terminating ice in direct contact with the open ocean.
Recent subglacial mapping and mass conservation calculations since
ARS5 (Morlighem et al., 2014; Morlighem et al., 2017) revise earlier
bathymetric maps under and around the ice sheet, and reveal deeper
and more extensive valley networks extending into the GIS interior
than previously known. Accurate subglacial topography is important
for modelling individual Greenland outlet glaciers (Aschwanden
et al., 2016; Morlighem et al., 2016); however, the importance of
these revised bedrock boundary conditions for the broader ice sheet
has yet to be fully tested. Based on the limited cross sectional area of
subglacial valleys and outlet glaciers on Greenland (Figure 4.7) and
the results of Nick et al. (2013), the effects of uncertain bathymetric
boundary conditions are assessed to be small relative to the
uncertainties in future SMB forcing (medium confidence).

In summary, new modelling since AR5 is consistent with previous
studies suggesting future Greenland ice loss over the 21st century
will be dominated by surface processes, rather than dynamic ice
discharge to the ocean, regardless of which emissions scenario
is followed (high confidence). Based on these modelling studies,
the GIS is not expected to contribute more than 20 cm of GMSL
tise by 2100 in a RCP8.5 scenario, similar to the upper end of the
likely range reported by ARS (Church et al, 2013). GIS simulations

346

are most sensitive to uncertainties in the applied climate forcing,
especially over this century (Edwards et al., 2014), but updated
climate projections since AR5 are not yet available. Because of the
consistency of recent modelling with the assessment of Church et al.
(2013), Greenland’s contribution to future sea level reported in ARS
was used in our projections of GMSL.

4.2.3.1.2 Antarctica

Unlike Greenland, most of the AIS margin terminates in the ocean. The
AIS also contains almost eight times more glacial ice above flotation
than Greenland, and nearly half of this ice is marine-based, that is,
grounded on bedrock hundreds of metres (or more) below sea level
(Figure 4.7; Fretwell et al, 2013). In places where the subglacial
bedrock slopes downward away from the coast (reverse-sloped),
the marine-based glacial ice is susceptible to dynamical instabilities
(Weertman, 1974; Schoof, 2007b; Pollard et al, 2015) that can
contribute rapid ice loss (Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3). The
instabilities can be triggered by the loss or thinning of ice shelves
through changes in the surrounding ocean and increased sub-ice melt
rates and changes in the overlying atmosphere affecting SMB and
surface meltwater production. Much progress has been made since
ARS in the understanding of these processes, but their representation in
continental-scale models continue to be heavily parameterised in most
cases. Complex interactions between the ice sheet, ocean, atmosphere
and underlying bedrock also remain difficult to simulate collectively.

In contrast to Greenland, Antarctica’s recent contribution to SLR has
been dominated by ice-dynamical processes rather than changes in
SMB (Mouginot et al., 2014; Rignot et al., 2014; Scheuchl et al., 2016;
Shen et al., 2018; The IMBIE team, 2018). Since ARS, it has become
increasingly evident that this ice loss is being driven by sub-ice
oceanic melt (thinning) of ice shelves (Paolo et al., 2015; Wouters
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

et al., 2015) and the resulting loss of back stress (buttressing) that
impedes the seaward flow of grounded ice upstream. Elevated melt
rates are generally associated with the increased presence of warm
Circumpolar Deep Water (CDW) on the continental shelf (Khazendar
et al, 2016). Dynamic ice loss driven by ocean changes have also
been observed on the East Antarctic margin (Li et al., 2016; Shen et al.,
2018). This is an important development, because East Antarctica
contains much more ice than West Antarctica, so even minor changes
there could make major contributions to sea level in the future.

Several of West Antarctica’s major outlet glaciers, including Pine Island
Glacier, and Thwaites Glacier in the Amundsen Sea (Figure 4.8) have
grounding lines currently retreating on retrograde bedrock (Rignot
et al., 2014). Thwaites Glacier is particularly important (Figure 4.8),
because it extends into the interior of the WAIS, where the bed is
>2000 m below sea level in places. By itself, the Thwaites drainage
area contains the equivalent of ~0.4 m GMSL (Holt et al., 2006; Millan
et al., 2017), but loss of the glacier could have a destabilising impact
on the entire WAIS (Feldmann and Levermann, 2015). The WAIS
contains enough ice to raise GMSL by ~3.4 m (Fretwell et al., 2013).
Since AR5, a number of ice sheet modelling studies have focussed on
limited fractions of Antarctica and so are not included in estimating
the SROCC Antarctic contribution to GMSL (see Section 4.2.3.2).
However, these studies do allow an assessment of the potential for
persistent and increasing ice loss, and the role of the marine ice sheet
instability (MISI, see Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3).

Joughin et al. (2014) modelled the response of the Thwaites Glacier
to a combination of elevated sub-ice melt rates and increased
precipitation and found persistent future retreat, despite either the
partial compensation of increased accumulation or a future reduction
in melt. Sub-ice melt rates sustained at current levels were found
to generate >1 mm yr equivalent GMSL rise within a millennium.
Higher melt rates and an assumed weak ice shelf triggered rapid
retreat within a few centuries. Similarly, Waibel et al. (2018) used
the BISICLES ice sheet model (Cornford et al., 2015) to investigate
the potential for self-sustained retreat of Thwaites Glacier, by
incrementally increasing sub-ice melt rates until retreat is triggered,
and then returning to pre-retreat melt rates. Consistent with Joughin
et al. (2014), they found self-sustained retreat of Thwaites Glacier
through MISI. Most uncertainty in their future WAIS simulations
arises from uncertainties in the long-term response of Thwaites
Glacier (Figure 4.8). Nias et al. (2016) demonstrated model sensitivity
of Thwaites Glacier to poorly resolved bedrock boundary conditions
(small scale topography), pointing to the need for better geophysical
information to reduce model uncertainty (Schlegel et al., 2018).
Arthern and Williams (2017) used adaptive mesh techniques, but with
a different formulation than Cornford et al., (2015), to simulate the
future response of Amundsen Sea outlet glaciers. They demonstrate
a sustained, but slow future retreat when sub-ice melt is maintained
at current rates, and a direct relationship between the strength of
ocean forcing and the pace of MISI-driven ice loss. Yu et al. (2018)
simulate future Thwaites retreat using a range of model formulations
with varying approximations of ice stress balance, different ocean
melt schemes, and different basal friction laws. Like Arthern and
Williams (2017) they find model-specific dependencies in the rate

Chapter 4

of ice loss, but all of their simulations demonstrate sustained ice loss
and a bathymetrically controlled future acceleration.

Like Thwaites, the neighbouring Pine Island Glacier (PIG) has also
been thinning and retreating at an accelerating rate in recent decades,
in response to incursions of warm CDW in the waters underlying the
glacier’s ice shelf. These incursions of CDW are controlled in part by
sea floor bathymetry and climatic variability (Dutrieux et al., 2014).
Favier et al. (2014) used three models with differing formulations to
simulate PIG’s response to elevated sub-ice melt. Consistent with
modelling of Thwaites Glacier (Joughin et al., 2014), all three models
demonstrate sustained future retreat at an increasing rate, as the
glacier backs onto its retrograde bed. Only one of the three models
used by Favier et al. (2014) demonstrates the possibility that the
glacier can recover if sub-ice melt rates are reduced enough to allow
the ice shelf to thicken and pin on bathymetric features to provide
buttressing. These results highlight the long-term commitment to
marine-based ice loss.

While limited to 50 year simulations, Seroussi et al. (2017) provide the
first interactively coupled ice-ocean model simulations of Thwaites
Glacier at a high spatial resolution. Their model demonstrates
MISI-like grounding line retreat at a rate of ~1 km yr-!, comparable
to observations between 1992 and 2011 (Rignot et al, 2014). The
retreat is interrupted when the main trunk of the glacier stabilises on
a bathymetric ridge, ~20 km upstream of the present-day grounding
line (Figure 4.8), but due to the short duration of the simulation, the
long-term potential for additional retreat into the interior of the ice
sheet is not captured.

Despite the use of independent model formulations, forcings, and
different geographic settings, the overall agreement among these
highly-resolved regional modelling studies and their ability to capture
current rates of retreat, increases confidence since AR5 that observed
retreat of Amundsen Sea outlet glaciers is driven by processes
consistent with MIS| theory (medium confidence), will continue
(medium confidence), and could accelerate (medium confidence).

Observations of rapid bedrock uplift in the Amundsen Sea, low
viscosity of the underlying mantle, and short GIA response times to
glacial unloading suggest ice-Earth interactions could be important
there (Barletta et al., 2018). Bedrock uplift and reduced gravitational
attraction between the ice sheet and ocean as an ice margin loses
mass reduces RSL at the grounding line, promoting stability and
providing a negative feedback on retreat (Adhikari et al., 2014;
Gomez et al., 2015). Using a high-resolution ice sheet-Earth model,
Larour et al. (2019) showed that long-term future retreat of Amundsen
Sea grounding lines are slowed by these processes, but the effect
is found to be minimal until after ~2250. This agrees with other
recent modelling accounting for ice-Earth interactions, including the
viscoelastic Earth response to changing ice loads and self-gravitation
(Gomez et al., 2015; Konrad et al., 2015; Pollard et al., 2017). These
studies also showed a small negative feedback on future retreat over
the next several centuries, particularly under strong climate forcing.
However, the viscosity structure of the Earth under the AIS is not
well resolved, and lateral variations in Earth structure could impact
these results (Hay et al., 2017). Based on these consistent model

347

 
Chapter 4 Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

| Snow accumulation

| [

Thwaites Glacier

    
  

 

  
   

 

   

 

, Warm marine air
Elevation
(m)
1000- joe © Expanding surface melt Runoft
Fut front? .
Grounding line cal -
"™ Saturatic, @ _
a, n
0- Ice flow ——p> ; Floating ice shelf Sa a a =
Reverse-sloped i ai Li
bedrock i ~
Possible future Amundsen Sea
-1000- pinning point?

  

Grounded marine-based ice

  

PEM MO Lore Ug
deep water (CDW)

 

 

¢ 400 km — i

40 km

Figure 4.8 | Processes affecting the Thwaites Glacier in the Amundsen Sea sector of Antarctica (adapted from Scambos et al, 2017). The grounding line is currently
retreating on reverse-sloped bedrock at a water depth of ~600 m (Voughin et al., 2014; Mouginot et al, 2014). The glacier terminus is ~120 km wide, widens upstream,
and is minimally buttressed by a laterally discontinuous ~40 km long ice shelf. The remaining shelf is thinning in response to warm, sub-shelf incursions of circumpolar
deep water (CDW), with melt rates up 200 m yr“! near the groundling line in some places (Milillo et al., 2019). The bathymetry upstream of the grounding zone is complex,
but it generally slopes downward into a deep basin, up to 2000 m below sea level under the centre of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) (far left), making the glacier

vulnerable to marine ice sheet instabilities (Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3).

results, and new observational evidence that PIG has been retreating
on reverse-sloped bedrock for a half-century or more (Smith et al,
2017), ice-Earth interactions are not expected to substantially slow
GMSL rise from marine-based ice in Antarctica over the 21st century
(medium confidence). However, these processes could become
important for GMSL rise on multi-century and longer time scales.

Atmospheric forcing is also becoming increasingly recognised to be
an important factor for the future of the AIS. A sustained (15 days)
melt event over the Ross Sea sector of the WAIS in 2016 illustrated
both the connectivity of Antarctica to the tropics and El Nifio, and the
possibility that future meltwater production on ice shelf surfaces could
change in the near future (Nicolas et al., 2017). This was highlighted
by Trusel et al. (2015), who evaluated the future expansion of surface
meltwater using the snow component in the RACMO2 regional
atmospheric model (Kuipers Munneke et al., 2012) and output from
CMIP5 GCMs. Under RCP8.5, they found a substantial expansion
of surface meltwater production on ice shelves late in the 21st
century that exceed melt rates observed before the 2002 collapse
of the Larsen B Ice Shelf. Surface meltwater is important for both ice
dynamics and SMB due to its potential to reduce albedo, saturate the
firn layer, deepen surface crevasses, and to cause flexural stresses
that can contribute to ice shelf break-up (hydrofracturing) (Banwell
et al., 2013; Kuipers Munneke et al., 2014). The presence of surface
meltwater does not necessarily lead to immediate ice shelf collapse
(Bell et al., 2017b; Kingslake et al., 2017), although surface meltwater
was a precursor on ice shelves which have collapsed (Scambos et al.,
2004; Banwell et al, 2013). This dichotomy illustrates the uncertain
role of meltwater and the need for additional study. When and if melt
rates will be sufficiently high in future warming scenarios to trigger
widespread hydrofracturing is a key question, because the loss of ice
shelves is associated with the onset of marine ice sheet instabilities
(Cross-chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3). Based on the single modelling
study by Trusel et al. (2015), it is not expected that widespread ice
shelf loss will occur before the end of the 21st century, but due to

348

limited observations and modelling to date, there is fow confidence
in this assessment.

Continental-scale ice sheet simulations are ultimately required
to provide projections of future GMSL rise from Antarctica. At this
spatial scale, most models rely on simplifying approximations of the
equations representing three-dimensional ice flow, and in some cases
they parameterise ice flow at the grounding line (Schoof, 2007b) to
improve computational efficiency. Such simplifications are necessary
to allow long simulations that can be validated against geological
information, in addition to modern observations (Briggs et al., 2013;
Pollard et al, 2016), however processes related to MIS! are best
represented at high spatial resolution and without simplifications of
the underlying physics (Pattyn et al, 2013; Reese et al., 2018c).

Various ice sheet model formulations, including the choice of
grounding line parameterisations and basal sliding schemes can
strongly affect model response to a given forcing (Brondex et al.,
2017; Pattyn, 2017), although sophisticated statistical methodologies
have been increasingly used since AR5 to quantitatively gauge model
uncertainty (Bulthuis et al., 2019; Edwards et al, 2019). Accurate
atmospheric forcing (SMB) and sub-ice melt are also prerequisite
to resolving the time-evolving dynamics of the system, with sub-ice
melt rates being particularly important (Schlegel et al., 2018). An
important ongoing deficiency is the lack of ice-ocean coupling in
most continental-scale studies, which remains too computationally
expensive to simulate the ocean at the spatial scales necessary to
capture circulation in ice shelf cavities and time-evolving ice-ocean
interactions (Donat-Magnin et al., 2017; Hellmer et al., 2017). Instead,
melt rates are often parameterised as a depth dependent function of
nearby ocean temperature derived from offline ocean models, but
the lack of ice-ocean interaction can seriously overestimate melt
rates in some settings (de Rydt et al., 2015; Seroussi et al, 2017).
Approaches that link offline ocean temperatures with efficient box
models of the circulation in ice shelf cavities have been developed
(Lazeroms et al, 2018; Reese et al., 2018a) and used in long-term
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

future simulations (Bulthuis et al., 2019), although they still require
uncoupled ocean models to provide time-evolving ocean conditions
outside the cavities.

Ritzet al. (2015) used a hybrid physical-statistical modelling approach,
whereby the timing of MISI onset is determined statistically rather
than physically. They estimated probabilities of MISI onset in eleven
different sectors around the ice sheet margin based on observations
of continent-wide retreat and thinning over the last few decades,
and expected future climate change following an IPCC SRES A1B
emission scenario only. In places where MIS| is projected to begin,
the persistence and rate of grounding-line retreat is parameterised
as a function of the local bedrock topography (slope), ice thickness
at grounding lines following Schoof (2007b), and basal friction. This
study represents a statistically rigorous approach in which model
parameters are based on a synthesis of observations and projected
surface and sub-shelf forcing, rather than coming directly from
climate and ocean models. However, the model calibrations rely
on recent observations, which may not provide adequate guidance
under warmer future conditions.

Levermann et al. (2014) use simplified emulations of temperature
increase in order to estimate both SMB and sub-ice melt (including a
parameterised delay for ocean warming) to determine the linearised
response of five ice sheet models calibrated against recent rates
of retreat. Substantial uncertainty arises from the different model
treatments of grounding line dynamics and ice shelves. However,
they conclude that the single greatest source of uncertainty stems
from the external forcing.

Golledge et al. (2015) used PISM (Parallel Ice Sheet Model;
Winkelmann et al., 2011) to simulate the future response of the AIS
to RCP emission scenarios. PISM links grounded, streaming, and shelf
flow, and has freely evolving grounding lines required to capture
MISI. PISM’s parameterised treatment of sub-ice melt applies melt
under partially grounded grid cells (Feldmann and Levermann, 2015),
making the model sensitive to subsurface ocean warming, although
the validity of this approach is contested (Arthern and Williams, 2017;
Seroussi and Morlighem, 2018; Yu et al, 2018). While providing
alternative outcomes with the two basal melt rate parameterisations,
the model is not calibrated to observations and doesn’t provide a
probability distribution. In a subsequent study Golledge et al. (2019)
used PISM, but with updated RCP climate forcing based on CMIP5
GCMs, and with sub-ice ocean melt calibrated to observations. An
offline, intermediate-complexity climate model was used to capture
global ice-climate feedbacks ignored in most other studies, but the
simulations only include RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 and do not extend
beyond 2100. Accounting for the climatic effects of meltwater input
from Greenland and Antarctica nearly doubled their estimates of
Antarctic’s contribution to GMSL in 2100 from 2.4 cm to 4.6 cm in
RCP4.5, and from 7.7 cm to 14 cm in RCP8.5. The increase is caused
by a combination of SMB decrease over the WAIS, combined with
subsurface ocean warming that increases sub-ice melt. However, the
climate model used to diagnose the spatial patterns of the atmospheric
and oceanic response to the meltwater input is simplistic. Bronselaer
et al. (2018) tested the global climatic response to future meltwater
input from Antarctica using an ensemble of GCM simulations, but

Chapter 4

without an interactive ice sheet. They simulated an RCP8.5 scenario
with and without a massive input of meltwater into the Southern
Ocean and demonstrate that the addition of Antarctic meltwater
expands sea ice in the Southern Ocean, delays the trajectory of
global warming, and moderates atmospheric warming around the
Antarctic coastline. Consistent with Golledge et al. (2019), they found
meltwater-induced stratification around Antarctica warms subsurface
ocean temperatures, indicating the potential for a positive meltwater
feedback on ice shelf melt. These studies reinforce the need for
continental-scale studies to consider two-way ice-climate coupling,
but with limited published studies to draw from and no simulations
run beyond 2100, firm conclusions regarding the net importance of
atmospheric versus ocean melt feedbacks on the long-term future of
Antarctica can not be made.

Bulthuis et al. (2019) used a different continental-scale ice sheet
model (Pattyn, 2017) with the same simplified atmospheric and
ocean forcing used by Golledge et al. (2015) to simulate RCP2.6,
RCP4.5, and RCP8.5 scenarios. Simulations with varying model
parameters were used to quantify uncertainties related to the
atmospheric forcing, various ice-model physics, and bedrock response
to changing ice loads. A key finding was that irrespective of model
parametric uncertainty, the strongly mitigated RCP2.6 scenario
prevents catastrophic WAIS collapse over the coming centuries. The
probabilistic projections of Antarctic GMSL contributions (Bulthuis
et al, 2019) represent a rigorous blending of physical ice sheet
modelling and uncertainty quantification (UQ) techniques, albeit with
a simplistic representation of future climate and using a relatively
coarse-resolution ice sheet model. These results are well-supported
by Schlegel et al. (2018), who blend UQ with a higher resolution ice
sheet model than used by Bulthuis et al. (2019), but using an idealised
climate forcing scheme not directly linked to time-evolving future
climate trajectories. Their 800 simulations, run to 2100, provide not
only probabilistic constraints on future GMSL-rise from Antarctica,
but an assessment of key drivers of uncertainty, including uniform
and regional dependencies on model physical parameters, climate
forcing, and boundary conditions. Sub-ice shelf melt rates provide
the greatest source of uncertainty in their projections, although the
source region dominating the GMSL contribution is found to be
dependent on the climate forcing applied, and different from those
found by Golledge et al. (2015).

DeConto and Pollard (2016) used an ice sheet model with a
formulation similar to that used by Golledge et al. (2015) and Bulthuis
et al. (2019) but they include glaciological processes not accounted
for in other continental-scale models: 1) surface melt and rain water
influence on hydrofracturing of ice shelves; and 2) brittle failure of
thick, marine-terminating ice fronts that have lost their buttressing
ice shelves. Where the ice fronts are thick enough to form tall ice cliffs
above the waterline, they can produce stresses exceeding the strength
of the ice, causing calving (Bassis and Walker, 2012). Once initiated,
ice-cliff calving has been hypothesised to produce a self-sustaining
Marine Ice Cliff Instability (MICI; Cross-chapter Box 8, Chapter 3).
The validity of MICI remains unproven (Edwards et al, 2019) and
is considered to be characterised by ‘deep uncertainty’, but it has
the potential to raise GMSL faster than MISI. DeConto and Pollard
(2016) represent hydrofracturing and ice-cliff calving with simple

349

 
 

Chapter 4

parameterisations, but the glaciological processes themselves are
supported by more detailed modelling and observations (Scambos
et al., 2009; Banwell et al., 2013; Ma et al., 2017; Wise et al., 2017;
Parizek et al., 2019). DeConto and Pollard (2016) provide four
ensembles for RCP2.6, RCP4.5, and RCP8.5 scenarios, representing
two alternative ocean model treatments and two alternative palaeo
sea level targets used to tune their model physical parameters.
However, their ensembles do not explore the full range of model
parameter space or provide a probabilistic assessment (Kopp et al.,
2017; Edwards et al., 2019). Under RCP2.6, DeConto and Pollard
(2016) find very little GMSL rise from Antarctica by 2100 (0.02-
0.16 m), consistent with the findings of Golledge et al. (2015) and
Bulthuis et al. (2019). In contrast, their four ensemble means range
between 0.26—-0.58 m for RCP4.5, and 0.64-1.14 m for RCP8.5. In
RCP8.5, rates of GMSL rise from Antarctica exceed 5 cm yr in the
22nd century and contribute as much as 15 m of GMSL rise by 2500,
largely due to the ice cliff calving process. The climate forcing used by
DeConto and Pollard (2016) simulates the appearance of extensive
surface meltwater several decades earlier than indicated by other
CMIP5 climate simulations (Trusel et al., 2015). Because their model
physics are sensitive to melt water through hydrofracturing, this
makes the timing and magnitude of their simulated ice loss too
uncertain to include in SROCC sea level projections. However, their
results do demonstrate the potential for brittle ice sheet processes
not considered by AR5 to exert a strong influence on future rates
of GMSL rise and the possibility that GMSL beyond 2100 could be
considerably higher than the fikely range projected by models that do
not include these processes.

4.2.3.2 Global and Regional Projections of Sea Level Rise

In addition to the model including MIC! from DeConto and Pollard
(2016), only a subset of studies (Levermann et al., 2014; Golledge
et al., 2015; Ritz et al., 2015; Bulthuis et al., 2019; Golledge et al,
2019), and statistical emulation of DeConto and Pollard (2016) by
Edwards et al. (2019) provide continental-scale estimates of future
Antarctic ice loss, under a range of GHG emissions scenarios. They
all provide probabilistic information, but vary considerably, both
in their physical approaches and their resulting projections of
Antarctica’s future contribution to GMSL. Such variations facilitate
the first quantitative uncertainty assessment of the full dynamical
contribution of Antarctica, which could not be made by Church
et al. (2013) in AR5. The assessment by Church et al. (2013), based
on a single statistical-physical model, reported median values (and
likely ranges) of 0.05 m (-0.04-0.13) and 0.04 m (-0.06-0.12), for
RCP4.5 and RCP8.5, respectively, for the total Antarctic contribution
in 2081-2100 relative to 1986-2005, and added the following:
‘Based on current understanding, only the collapse of marine-based
sectors of the AIS, if initiated, could cause GMSL to rise substantially
above the /ikely range during the 21st century. This potential
additional contribution cannot be precisely quantified but there is
medium confidence that it would not exceed several tenths of a
metre of SLR during the 21st century (Church et al., 2013). Given the
above-mentioned publications after AR5, Antarctica’s contribution to
sea level change was reassessed and now include the possibility of
MISI allowing for a more complete assessment of the /ikefy range
of the projections for three RCP scenarios. Our assessment is based

350

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

on process-based numerical models of the AIS, driven by diverse
climate scenarios. Results are discussed in the context of an expert
elicitation study (Bamber et al, 2019), probabilistic studies (Perrette
et al., 2013; Slangen et al, 2014a; Grinsted et al., 2015; Jackson
and Jevrejeva, 2016) and a sensitivity study (Schlegel et al., 2018)
assessing the uncertainty in snow accumulation, ocean-induced
melting, ice viscosity, basal friction, bedrock elevation and the effect
of ice shelves on ice mass loss in 2100, Figure 4.4.

Ritz et al. (2015) is difficult to contextualise as they only provided
estimates for the A1B scenario and not for the RCP scenarios. Despite
this limitation their results, which are close to the other studies,
are included as if they represent RCP8.5 and as such supports the
assessment. The results by DeConto and Pollard (2016) indicate
significantly higher mass loss even for RCP4.5, potentially related to
their high surface melt rates on the ice shelves as contested by Trusel
et al. (2015). This early onset of high surface melt rates in DeConto and
Pollard (2016) leads to extensive hydrofracturing of ice shelves before
the end of the 21st century and therefore to rapid ice mass loss. For this
reason, their results and probabilistic (e.g., Kopp et al, 2017; Le Bars
et al., 2017) and statistical emulation estimates that build on them
(Edwards et al., 2019), are not used in SROCC sea level projections.
Consequently, the process-based studies by Golledge et al. (2015),
Ritz et al. (2015), Levermann et al. (2014), Golledge et al. (2019), and
Bulthuis et al. (2019) are used to assess the Antarctic contribution for
the different RCP scenarios. The study by Schlegel et al. (2018) does
not provide RCP based scenarios, but is considered as an extensive
sensitivity estimate providing a high-end estimate based on physical
process understanding of the Antarctic contribution.

Each study expresses an uncertainty in the Antarctic contribution to
GMSL rise which is, in part, dependent on a common driver, namely
regional warming. The uncertainties were therefore interpreted as
being dependent and propagate the total uncertainty accordingly. As
a result, the total uncertainty exceeds that of the individual studies,
which reflects that the individual studies only sample a fraction of
the total uncertainty. The uncertainty estimates of Levermann et al.
(2014) concentrate on the oceanic basal melt rates including a time
delay between atmosphere and ocean temperature, but do not
consider other sources of uncertainty. Ritz et al. (2015) is constrained
by observations and provides an asymmetric distribution of the rate
of mass loss. The ice sheet simulations by Golledge et al. (2015)
and Golledge et al. (2019) only provide two alternative subgrid
parameterisations for sub-ice melt, rather than a statistical estimate
of the uncertainty. The more sensitive of these two parameterisations
which induces more ice loss is challenged by Seroussi and Morlighem
(2018). In order to assess a realistic uncertainty for the total Antarctic
contribution, it was first assumed that Golledge et al. (2015) and
Golledge et al. (2019) are dependent, because they use similar
parameterisations. For each study, a probabilistic distribution is used,
assuming a normal distribution with a /ikely range bounded by the
high and low estimate from those studies. Levermann et al. (2014)
also provides two alternatives, one with and one without a time
delay between oceanic temperatures below the Antarctic ice shelves
and global mean atmospheric temperature. As it is unclear which
version best matches the updated record of ice loss presented by The
IMBIE team, (2018), results are combined assuming full probabalistic
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

dependence as for the two Golledge studies. Bulthuis et al. (2019)
uses a simplified ice sheet model to study the uncertainty caused
by the atmospheric forcing, ice dynamics, ice and bed rheology,
calving and sub-shelf melting. Finally, the studies by Ritz et al.
(2015), Bulthuis et al. (2019) and the averages for Golledge and
Levermann are combined to identify a best estimate for the Antarctic
contribution under RCP8.5. This results in a median contribution of
16 cm in 2100 under RCP8.5. A Monte Carlo technique is used to
combine the uncertainties in the aforementioned studies, assuming
mutual dependence. The resulting 5—95 percentile range, 2-37 cm in
2100 under RCP8.5, is assessed as the /ikely range. This assessment is
used in order to reflect ongoing limited understanding of the physics
and the fact that the individual studies only reflect part of the total
uncertainty. The distribution is slightly skewed to higher values,
because of an underlying skewness in the studies of Levermann et al.
(2014) and Ritz et al. (2015). This skewed distribution is supported by
an expert elicitation study (Bamber et al., 2009). The expert elicitation
approach (Bamber et al., 2018), which applied elicitation to both ice
sheets, suggests considerably higher values for total SLR for RCP2.6,
RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 than provided in Table 4.3.

As the importance of MIS| and MICI is difficult to assess on longer
time scales, there remains deep uncertainty for the Antarctic
contribution to GMSL after 2100 (Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 1).
Results on these long-time scales are discussed in 4.2.3.5.

Chapter 4

There is limited evidence for major changes since AR5 in the
non-Antarctic components. Recent projections of the glacier
contribution are nearly identical to AR5 results used here (see
Cross-Chapter Box 6 in Chapter 2). Greenland, thermal expansion
and land water storage are also not updated, mainly due to a
lack of updated CMIP simulations. Hence, our revised projections
replace only the AR5 estimate for Antarctica by a new assessment
as outlined in the previous paragraph based on post-AR5 literature
and maintaining identical contributions for the non-Antarctic
components. As no general dependence between the Antarctic
contribution and the non-Antarctic components can be derived from
the four studies, independent uncertainties are assumed, which is
close to the uncertainty propagation by Church et al. (2013).

Time series for the different RCP scenarios are shown in Figure 4.9
indicating a divergence in median and upper /ikely range for RCP8.5
during the second half of the century between this report and the
ARS5 projections (Church et al., 2013). The value of the Antarctic
contribution in 2081-2100 under RCP8.5 is the individual component
with the largest uncertainty. As a consequence, the uncertainty
in the GMSL projections is slightly increased compared to Church
et al. (2013). Nevertheless, results can also be considered to be
consistent with Church et al. (2013). In AR5, the potential additional
contribution by ice dynamics, was estimated to be not more than
several tenths of a metre but excluded from projections; here this

Table 4.3 | An overview of different studies estimating the future Antarctic contribution to sea level rise (SLR), listed here are median values. Estimates from Golledge et al.
(2015) are based on the average contribution to Global Mean Sea Level (GMSL) over the full 21st century, based on two alternative ensembles using different sub-ice melt
schemes. This average is not explicitly reported in the original paper where the individual values of 0.1 and 0.39 m are reported. SMB is the surface mass balance, BMB the
basal melt balance, LIG is Last Interglacial, MICI is marine ice cliff instability, GCM is General Circulation Model, PDD is positive-degree day.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Tae Ritz et al. (2015) Golledge et al. Golledge et al. DMO} Ce Bulthuis et al.
(2014) ’ (2015) (2019) Pollard (2016) (2019)
RCP2.6/ RCP2.6/ RCP2.6/ RCP2.6/ RCP2.6/ RCP2.6/
RCP4.5/ RCP4.5/ RCP4.5/ RCP4.5/ RCP4.5/ RCP4.5/
AIB/ AIB/ AIB/ AIB/ AIB/ AIB/
RCP8.5 RCP8.5 RCP8.5 RCP8.5 RCP8.5 RCP8.5
Antarctica 2050 (m) 0.03/0.03/-/0.03 -1-10.03/- 0.00/0.01/-/0.02 -10.0/-10.02 0.02/0.03/-/0.04 0.01/0.01/-/0.03
Antarctica 2100 (m) 0.07/0.09/-/0.11 -f-10.12/- 0.02/0.05/-/0.18 -10.04/-10.11 0.14/0.41/-/0.79 0.03/0.05/-/0.11
Antarctica 2200 (m) 0.16/0.25/-/0.54 -/-10.41/- 0.10/0.32/-/1.15 -I-Hl- 0.35/1.67/-/5.39/ 0.08/0.15/-/0.45
Uncertainties Ensembles Quantiles High-average High-average Ensemble selections Stochastic sensitivities
. . Present-Day rates . Present-Day rates
Tuning targets variable . None None LIG and Pliocene .
from observations from observations
. . Conditional on bed Subgrid Sub-grid Pollard and DeConto Schoof {2007a);
Grounding Line Poor co, co, .
slope and Schoof flux parameterisation parameterisation {2012) Tsai et al. (2015)
Several basal Hybrid, 10-20 km grid Hybrid, 10-20 km grid . . . .
Dynamics Traditional we 5 \ . oe 5 \ . oe Hybrid, 10 km grid Hybrid, 20 km grid
friction laws Till friction angle Till friction angle
Hydrofracturing No No No No Yes No
MICl No No No No Yes No
Focus on long time Focus on loni
Initialisation variable Observed rates " a . " 9 1950 Close to steady state
scales time scales
, . . Van Wessem
SMB No Parameterised PDD scheme PDD scheme Regional Climate Model
et al. (2014)
BMB Linear perturbation Parameterised Slab Ocean GCM Slab Ocean GCM NCAR CCSM4. Reese et al. {2018a)
Driving mechanism . . . Atmospheric Atmospheric
Ocean only Observations, statistics Ocean (2/3) Intermediate complexity . . .
for retreat forcing dominates and ocean forcing

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

351

 
 

Chapter 4

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Table 4.4 | Median values and fikely ranges for projections of global mean sea level (GMSL) rise in metres in 2081-2100 relative to 1986-2005 for three scenarios. In
addition, values of GMSL rise are given for 2046-2065 and 2100, and the rate of GMSL rise is given for 2100. Values between parentheses reflect the /kely range. SMB
is surface mass balance, DYN is dynamical contribution, LWS is land water storage. Total AR5 minus Antarctica ARS is the GMSL rise contribution in Church et al. (2013)
without the Antarctic contribution of Church et al. (2013). The newly derived Antarctic contribution is added to this to arrive at the GMSL rise.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

aa) RCP4.5 ite ie) Cee ee
Thermal expansion 0.14 (0.10-0.18) 0.19 (0.14-0.23) 0.27 (0.21-0.33) ARS
Glaciers 0.10 (0.04-0.16) 0.12 {0.06-0.18) 0.16 (0,09-0.23) ARS
Greenland SMB 0.03 (0.01-0.07) 0.04 (0.02-0.09) 0.07 (0.03-0.17) ARS
Greenland DYN 0.04 (0.01-0.06) 0.04 (0.01-0.06) 0.05 (0.02-0.07) ARS
LWS 0.04 (-0.01-0.09) 0.04 (-0.01-0.09) 0.04 (-0.01-0.09) ARS
Total AR5 — Antarctica AR5*; we
ota marctica 0.35 (0.23-0.48) 0.43 (0.30-0.57) 0.60 (0.43-0.78) SROCC implicit in ARS
2081-2100
Total ARS ~ Antarctica ARS; 0.22 (0.15-0.29) 0.24 (0.17-0.31) 0.28 (0.20-0.36) SROCC implicit in ARS
2046-2065 ae eee aoa mpnct
Antarctica 2031-2050 0.01 {0.00-0.03) 0.01 {0.00-0.03) 0.02 {0.00-0.05) SROCC
Antarctica 2046-2065 0.02 {0.00-0.05) 0.02 {0.01-0.05) 0.03 (0.00-0.08) SROCC
Antarctica 2081-2100 0.04 (0.01-0.10) 0.05 (0.01-0.13) 0.10 (0.02-0.23) SROCC
Antarctica 2100 0.04 (0.01-0.11) 0.06 (0.01-0.15) 0.12 {0.03-0.28) SROCC
GMSL 2031-2050 0.17 (0.12-0.22) 0.18 (0.13-0.23) 0.20 (0.15-0.26) SROCC
GMSL 2046-2065 0.24 (0.17-0.32) 0.26 (0.19-0.34) 0.32 (0.23-0.40) SROCC
GMSL 2081-2100 0.39 (0.26-0.53) 0.49 (0.34-0.64) 0.71 (0.51-0.92) SROCC
GMSL in 2100 0.43 (0.29-0.59) 0.55 (0.39-0.72) 0.84 (0.61-1.10) SROCC
Rate (mm yr!) 4(2-6) 7{4-9) 15{10-20) SROCC
Notes:
*The uncertainty in this value is calculated as in Church et al. (2013).
1.25
Global mean RCP2.6 RCP4.5 RCP8.5
sea level (m) 1.00 EF 4 - 4
075-4 L 4 L 4
0.50 4 - ' 4 4
Q iW
Q
0.25 4 L. 4 }2e 4
SB oe
om n
o
0 T T T
2000 2050 2100 2000 2050 2100 2000 2050 2100
Year Year Year

Figure 4.9 | Time series of Global Mean Sea Level (GMSL) for Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)2.6, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 as used in this report and, for
reference the IPCC Sth Assessment Report (ARS) results (Church et al, 2013). Results are based on ARS results for all components except the Antarctic contribution. Results
for the Antarctic contribution in 2081-2100 are provided in Table 4.4. The shaded region is considered to be the fikely range.

value was assessed to be 16 cm (5-95 percentile; 2-37 cm) and
include it in the projections. As the projections build on the CMIP5
work presented in AR5, and also given the limited exploration of
uncertainty in estimates from each individual study, the results of
the 5-95 percentile are interpreted to represent the /ikely range, that
is, the 17-83 percentile, as assessed by Church et al. (2013) and as
assessed in AR5 for other CMIP5-derived results.

352

Projections as presented in Table 4.4 are used to calculate the regional
RSL projections as outlined in AR5 by including gravitational and
rotational patterns as shown in Figure 4.10 and subsequently used
in 4.2.3.4 to calculate ESL projections. Including the updated results
in terms of magnitude and uncertainty for the Antarctic component
also changes the regional patterns in sea level projections. Results
of the regional patterns in Figure 4.10 show an increased SLR with
respect to the results presented in AR5 nearly everywhere for RCP8.5
because of the increased Antarctic contribution.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

2046-2065

 

-0.4
Regional mean sea level change (m)

-0.2

Chapter 4

2081-2100

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

Figure 4.10 | Regional sea level change for RCP2.6, RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 in metres as used in this report for extreme sea level (ESL) events. Results are median values
based on the values in Table 4.4 for Antarctica including GIA and the gravitational and rotational effects, and results by Church et al (2013) for glaciers, land water storage
(LWS) and Greenland. The left column is for the time slice 2046-2065 and the right column for 2081-2100.

4.2.3.3 Probabilistic Sea Level Projections

Since ARS, several studies have produced SLR projections in coherent
frameworks that link together global-mean and RSL rise projections.
The approaches are generally similar to those adopted by ARS for
its global-mean sea level projections: a bottom-up accounting of
different contributing processes (e.g., land-ice mass loss, thermal
expansion, dynamic sea level), of which many are ‘probabilistic’,
in that they attempt to describe more comprehensive probability
distributions of sea level change than the /ikely ranges presented
by Church et al. (2013). An overview of probabilistic approaches is
presented in Garner et al. (2017), indicating higher values for post
ARS studies mainly reflecting increased uncertainty based on a single
contested study for the Antarctic contribution (DeConto and Pollard,
2016). As such many of these probabilistic studies present full

probability density function conditional not only on an RCP scenario,
but with additional and equally important a priori assumptions
concerning for instance the Antarctic contribution over which a
consensus has yet to solidify. An example is the study by Le Bars
et al. (2017) who expand the projection by Church et al. (2013) in
a probabilistic way with the Antarctic projections by DeConto and
Pollard (2016) to obtain a full probability density function for SLR
for RCP8.5. Other probabilistic approaches are provided by Kopp
et al. (2014) and Jackson and Jevrejeva (2016) using different ice
sheet representations drawing on expert elicitation (Bamber and
Aspinall, 2013). Probabilistic estimates are useful for a quantitative
risk management perspective (see Section 4.3.3). An even more
general approach than the probabilistic estimates has been taken
by Le Cozannet et al. (2017) who frame a ‘possibilistic’ framework of
SLR including existing probabilistic estimates and combining them.

353

 
 

Chapter 4

This section first briefly reviews key sources of information for
probabilistic projections (Section 4.2.3.3.1), with a focus on
new results since AR5, then summarises the different global and
regional projections (Section 4.2.3.3.2). Eventually, bottom-up
projections were distinguished which explicitly describe the
different components of SLR (Section 4.2.3.3.3) from semi-empirical
projections (Section 4.2.3.3.4).

4.2.3.3.1 Components of probabilistic global mean
sea level projections

Thermal expansion: Global mean thermal expansion projections rely
on coupled climate models projections (Kopp et al., 2014; Slangen
et al, 2014a; Jackson and Jevrejeva, 2016) or simple climate model
projections (Perrette et al., 2013; Nauels et al., 2017b; Wong et al.,
2017), and are substantively unchanged since ARS. For those studies
relying on the CMIP5 GCM ensemble, interpretations of the model
output differ mainly with regard to how the range is understood. For
example, Kopp et al. (2014), interprets the 5-95 percentile of CMIP5
values as a likely range of thermal expansion. The differences among
the studies yield discrepancies smaller than 10 cm, e.g., Slangen et al.
(2014a) use 20-36 cm in 2081-2100 with respect to 1986-2005,
while (Kopp et al., 2014) project a likely range of 28-46 cm in 2081-
2099 with respect to 1991-2009.

Glaciers: Projections of glacier mass change rely either on models of
glacier SMB and geometry, forced by temperature and precipitation
fields (Slangen and Van de Wal, 2011; Marzeion et al., 2012;
Hirabayashi et al., 2013; Radi¢ et al., 2014; Huss and Hock, 2015), or
simple scaling relationships with global mean temperature (Perrette
et al., 2013; Bakker et al., 2017; Nauels et al., 2017a). Glacier mass
change projections published since AR5, based on newly developed
glacier models, confirm the overall assessment of AR5 (see also
Section 4.2.3.2).

Land water storage: Projections of the GMSL rise contributions due
to dam impoundment and groundwater withdrawal are generally
either calibrated to hydrological models (e.g., Wada et al., 2012) or
neglected. Recent coupled climate-hydrological modelling suggests
that a significant minority of pumped groundwater remains on land,
which may reduce total GMSL rise relative to studies assuming full
drainage to the ocean (Wada et al., 2016). Kopp et al. (2014) estimated
land water storage based on population projections. However, there
are no substantive updates to projections of the future land-water
storage contribution to GMSL rise since AR5.

Ice sheets: GMSL projections in previous IPCC assessments were
based on results from physical models of varying degree of complexity
interpreted using expert judgment of the assessment authors (Meehl
et al., 2007; Church et al., 2013). ARS (Church et al., 2013) used this
approach and is partly based on the assessment of statistical-physical
modelling of the Antarctic contribution (Little et al., 2013). As an
alternative to the model-based approach, several studies have applied
structured expert elicitation to the GMSL contribution of ice sheets.
This approach is based on a more formal expert elicitation protocol
(Cooke, 1991; Bamber and Aspinall, 2013; Bamber et al., 2019) instead
of physically based models. Combining the Antarctic contribution from

354

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

the expert elicitation with the non-Antarctic components from AR5 as
done for Table 4.4 leads to an estimated SLR of 0.95 m (median) for
the high scenario and an upper /ikely range of 1.32 m (Figure 4.2),
which is slightly higher than the process-based results. Results by
Bamber and Aspinall (2013) were criticised because of their procedure
for post-processing the expert data of individual ice sheets to a total
sea level contribution from the ice sheets (de Vries and van de Wal,
2015; Bamber et al., 2016; de Vries and van de Wal, 2016). Bamber
et al. (2019) avoids this issue by eliciting expert judgments about ice
sheet dependence. Alternatively, Horton et al. (2014) used a simpler
elicitation protocol focusing on the total SLR rather than the ice sheet
contribution alone. Finally, several probabilistic studies (e.g., Bakker
et al., 2017; Kopp et al., 2017; Le Bars et al., 2017) used the results of
a single ice sheet model study from DeConto and Pollard (2016) as the
Antarctic contribution to GMSL.

Beside the total contribution of ice sheets several studies address
the individual contribution of either Greenland or Antarctica (see
Section 4.2.3.1.1 and 4.2.3.1.2) based on ice dynamical studies.
Critical for GMSL projections is the low confidence in the dynamic
contribution of the AIS beyond 2050 in previous assessments, as
discussed in Section 4.2.3.1.2.

4.2.3.3.2 From probabilistic global mean sea level projections
to regional relative sea level change

Differences between GMSL and RSL change are driven by three main
factors: (1) changes in the ocean, for instance, the thermal expansion
component and the circulation driven changes, (2) gravitational and
rotational effects caused by redistribution of mass within cryosphere
and hydrosphere, leading to spatial patterns, and (3) long term
processes caused by GIA that lead to horizontal and VLM. Finally,
the inverse barometer effect caused by changes in the atmospheric
pressure, sometimes neglected in projections, can also make a small
contribution, particularly on shorter time scales. For the 21st century
as a whole, estimates of the latter are smaller than 5 cm at local
scales (Church et al., 2013; Carson et al., 2016).

Ocean Dynamic sea level: Projections of dynamic sea level change are
necessarily derived through interpretations of coupled climate model
projections. As with thermal expansion projections, interpretations
of the CMIP5 ensemble differ with regard to how the model range
is understood and the manner of drift correction, if any (Jackson
and Jevrejeva, 2016). However, relative to tide-gauge observations,
coupled climate models tend to overestimate the memory in dynamic
sea level; thus, they may underestimate the emergence of the
externally forced signal of DSL change above scenario uncertainty
(Becker et al., 2016). ODSL from coupled climate models does not
include the changes resulting from ice melt because ice melt is
calculated off-line.

Gravitational-rotational and deformational effects (GRD; Gregory
et al., 2019): All projections of RSL change include spatial patterns
in sea level for cryospheric changes, which however may differ in the
details with which these are represented. Some studies also include a
spatial pattern for land-water storage change (Slangen et al., 201 4a),
anthropogenic subsidence is not included. Recent work indicates
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

that, for some regions with low mantle viscosity, spatial patterns
cannot be treated as fixed on multi-century time scales (Hay et al.,
2017). This effect has not yet been incorporated into comprehensive
RSL projections, but is probably only of relevance near ice sheets.
For adaptation purposes, Larour et al. (2017) developed a mapping
method to indicate which areas of ice mass loss are important for
which major port city. There is high confidence in the patterns caused
by GRD, as in ARS.

Vertical land motion (VLM): These processes can be an important
driver of RSL change, particularly in the near- to intermediate-field
of the large ice sheets of the LGM (e.g., North America and northern
Europe). This process is incorporated either by physical modelling
(Slangen et al., 2014a) or by estimation of a long-term trend from
tide-gauge data (e.g., Kopp et al., 2014), which is then spatially
extrapolated. In the former case, only the long-term GIA process
is included in the projections, but it excludes other important local
factors contributing to VLM (eg., tectonic uplift/subsidence and

Chapter 4

groundwater/hydrocarbon withdrawal); by using only tide gauge
measurements, projections may assume that these other processes
proceed at a steady rate and thus do not allow for management
changes that affect groundwater extraction.

4.2.3.3.3  Semi-empirical projections

Semi-empirical models provide an alternative approach to
process-based models aiming to close the budget between the
observed SLR and the sum of the different components contributing
to SLR. In general, motivated by a mechanistic understanding,
semi-empirical models use statistical correlations from time series
analysis of observations to generate projections (Rahmstorf, 2007;
Vermeer and Rahmstorf, 2009; Grinsted et al., 2010; Kemp et al., 2011;
Kopp et al., 2016). They implicitly assume that the processes driving
the observations and feedback mechanisms remain similar over the
past and future. In the past, differences between semi-empirical
projections and process-based models were significant but for

Table 4.5 | Sources of Information Underlying Probabilistic Projections of Sea level Rise (SLR) Projections. CMIP5 is Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase
5, GRD is gravitational, rotational and deformation effects, SMB is surface mass balance, AR4 is IPCC 4th Assessment Report, VLM is vertical land motion, GIA is

glacio-isostatic adjustment.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

aMTeveuate]| : ETAT Cip Dynamic sea
Study Q Glaciers ery i GRD
Cr] SY eT1 level
Global SMB sensitivi
ttvity Greenland’s SMB from
Perrette et al. and exponent from AR4; semi-empirical Bamber et al
. CMIP5 AR4; total glacier Not included ‘ " pl ' . CMIPS . Not included
{2013) . model using historical {2009)
volume from Radi¢ observations
and Hock (2010) °
Church GIA projec-
Grinsted et al. t al, (2013); Expert Bamber et al. tions from Hill
rinsten er | CMIPS Church et al,(2013) | Wada etal, (2012) ©! (2013) Expe CMIPS amber era ee
{2015) elicitation from Bamber {2009) et al. (2010) using
and Aspinall (2013) observations
CMIP5; glacier area SMB Meeh| et al. {2007), . .
Slangen et al. inventory Radi¢ and ice dynamics Meeh| et al Slangen et al. GIA resulting of ice
3 "| CMIPS ry Rae Wada et al, (2012) y "| CMs 3 sheet melt from gla-
{2014a) Hock (2010) in a gla- {2007) and Katsman {201 4a) .
. cier mass loss model
cier mass loss model et al. (2011)
Chambers et al Church GIA, tectonics,
Kopp et al. CMIPS CMIP5; Marzeion (2017): Koniko . et al. (2013); Expert ees Mitrovica et al. and subsidence
{2014) et al. (2012) (201 1) mow elicitation from Bamber {2011) from Kopp et al.
and Aspinall (2013) {2013)
Chambers et al GIA, tectonics,
Kopp et al. MIPS CMIP5; Marzeion (2017): Koniko . DeConto and cMIPS Mitrovica et al. and subsidence
(2017) et al, (2012)  Ronkow Pollard (2016) (2011) from Kopp et al.
{2011)
{2013)
Four glacier models:
Giesen and Gerlemans
(2013) DeConto and
Le Bars et al. . Pollard {2016);
CMIP5S Marzeion et al. (2012), | Wada et al. (2012) . CMIP5 - -
{2017) 7 Fettweis et al. (2013)
Radi¢ et al. (2014) Church et al, (2013)
Slangen and Van de u ,
Wal (2011)
Church GIA resulting of ice
Jackson and et al, (2013); Expert Bamber et al sheet melt from gla-
Jevrejeva CMIPS Marzeion et al. (2012) Wada et al. (2012) ae p CMIP5 . cier mass loss model
(2016) elicitation from Bamber {2009) Peltier et al (2015)
and Aspinall (2013) .
CMIP5; glacier area Church et al. (2013); . .

: . a sae . oe GIA resulting of ice
de Winter ees inventory Radi¢ and Wada et al. (2012) Expert elicitation de Vries ees Mitrovica et al. sheet melt from cla
et al. 2017) Hock (2010) in a gla- . and van de Wal {2015); {2001) . g

. . cier mass loss model
cier mass loss model Ritz et al. {2015)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

355

 
 

Chapter 4

more recent studies the differences are vanishingly small. Ongoing
advances in closing the sea level budget and in the process
understanding of the dynamics of ice have reduced the salience of
estimates from semi-empirical models. Moreover, the results from
semi-empirical models (Kopp et al, 2016; Mengel et al., 2016) are
in general agreement with Church et al. (2013), except when those
results reflect the combined hydrofracturing and ice cliff instability
mechanism as presented by DeConto and Pollard (2016). At the same
time, semi-empirical models based on past observations capture
poorly or miss altogether the recent observed changes in Antarctica.
MISI may lend a very different character to ice sheet evolution in
the near future than in the recent past and hydrofracturing remains
impossible to quantify from observational records only. For this
reason, a new generation of semi-empirical models and emulators
has been developed that estimate individual components of SLR,
which the former models do not (Mengel et al., 2018). These newer
models aim to emulate the response of more complex models
providing more detailed information for different climate scenarios
or probability estimates than process-based models (Bakker et al.,
2017; Nauels et al, 2017a; Wong et al., 2017; Edwards et al., 2019).

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

4.2.3.3.4 Recent probabilistic and semi-empirical projections

A wide range of probabilistic sea level projections exist, ranging from
simple scaling relations to partly process-based components combined
with scaling relations. Table 4.5 illustrates the overlap between many
of the studies, a complete overview is presented by Garner et al. (2017),
and differences between different classes of models are discussed in
Horton et al. (2018). Many studies rely on CMIP simulations for an
important part of their sea level components. The largest difference
can be found in the treatment of the ice dynamics, particularly for
Antarctica, which are usually not CMIP5 based. Instead, each derives
from one of several estimates of the Antarctic contribution. These
results are useful for the purposes of elucidating sensitivities of
process-based studies and effects of changing components to the
total projection. This report relies on the Antarctic component from
Section 4.2.3.2 for calculating the /ikely range of RSL. Hence the values
in Table 4.5 are not used for the final assessment of RSL including
the SROCC specific Antarctic contribution presented in Section 4.2.3.2.
Comparing the probabilistic projections (Table 4.6) is difficult because
of the subtle differences between their assumptions. Nevertheless,
values range much more for 2100 than for 2050.

Table 4.6 | Median and fikely Global Mean Sea Level (GMSL) rise projections (m). Values between brackets are //kely range, if no values are given the ikely range is not
available. The table shows result from the probabilistic and semi-empirical results. A is 2000 as base line year up to 2100; B is the average of 1986-2005 as base line for

the projection up to 2081-2100, C 1980-1999 as baseline up to 2090-2099.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2050 2100
Period aa) ta a) RCP8.5 aa) RCP4.5 ita tie)
Perrette et al. C 0.28 0.28 0.86 1.06
{2013) {0,23-0.32) {0.23-0.34) {0.66-1.11) {0,.78-1.43)
Grinsted et al. nN 0.8
{2015) {0,58-1.20)
Slangen et al. BABB 0.54 0.71
{201 4a) {0.35-0.73) {0.43-0.99)
Kopp et al, (2014) A 0.25 0.26 0.29 0.50 0.59 0.79
ep , {0.21-0.29) {0.21-0.31) {0.24-0.34) {0.37-0.65) {0.45-0.77) {0.62-1.00)
0.23 0.26 0.31 0.56 0.91 1.46
Kopp et al. (2017 A
PP ‘ } {0.16-0.33) {0,18-0.36) {0,22-0.40) {0.37-0.78) {0.66-1.25) {1,09-2.09)
de Winter et al.
(2017) B 0.68/0.86
Jackson and B 0.54 0.75
Jevrejeva (2016) {0,.36-0.72) {0.54-0.98)
Le Bars et al. B 1.06 1.84
{2017) {0.65-1.47) {1,.24-2.46)
Nauels et al. B 0.24 0.25 0.27 0.45 0.55 0.79
{2017b) {0.19-0.30) {0.21-0.30) {0,23-0.33) {0.35-0.56) {0.45-0.67) {0.65-0.97)
Bakker et al. (2017) | A 0.20 0.23 0.25 0.53 0.72 1.16
Wong et al. (2017) A 0.26 0.28 0.30 0.55 0.77 1.50
Jevrejeva et al. nN 0.80
{201 4a) {0.6-1.2)
Schaeffer et al. A 0.90 102
{2012)
Mengel et al.
(2016) B 0.18 0.18 0.21 0.39 0.53 0.85

 

 

 

 

 

356
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

4.2.3.4 Changes in Extreme Sea Level events

ESL events are water level heights that consist of contributions from
mean sea level, storm surges and tides. Compound effects of surges
and tides are drivers of the ESL events. Section 4.2.3.4.1 discusses
the combination of mean sea level change with a characterisation
of the ESL events derived from tide gauges over the historical period
and the sections 4.2.3.4.2 and 4.2.3.4.3 evaluate possible changes
in these characteristics caused by cyclones and waves. This section
discusses the importance of ESL and different modelling strategies to
improve our understanding of ESL projections.

Even a small increase in mean sea level can significantly augment
the frequency and intensity of flooding. This is because SLR elevates
the platform for storm surges, tides, and waves, and because there is
a log-linear relationship between a flood’s height and its occurrence
interval. Changes are most pronounced in shelf seas. Roughly 1.3%
of the global population is exposed to a 1 in 100-year™ flood (Muis
et al., 2016). This exposure to ESL and resulting damage could
increase significantly with SLR, potentially amounting to 10% of the
global GDP by the end of the century in the absence of adaptation
(Hinkel et al., 2014).

The frequency and intensity of ESL events can be estimated with
Statistical models or hydrodynamical models constrained by
observations. Hydrodynamic models simulate a series of ESL events
over time, which can then be fitted by extreme value distributions
to estimate the frequency and intensity (e.g. the return level of an
event occurring with a period of 100 years or frequency of 0.01 yr’,
also called the 100-year event). A tide model is sometimes included
and sometimes added offline to estimate the ESL events. Statistical
models fit tide gauge observations to extreme value distributions to
directly estimate ESL events or combine probabilistic RSL scenarios
with storm surge modelling. This can be done on global scale or
local scale. For example, Lin et al. (2016) and Garner et al. (2017)
estimate the increase in flood frequency along the US east coast.
Both of these modelling approaches can account for projections of
SLR. Rasmussen et al. (2018) used a combination of a global network
of tide gauges and a probabilistic localised SLR to estimate expected
ESL events showing inundation reductions for different temperature
stabilisation targets as shown in the SR15 report.

An advantage of the use of hydrodynamic models is that they can
quantify interactions between the different components of ESL (Arns
et al., 2013). Hydrodynamical models can be executed over the entire
ocean with flexible grids at a high resolution (up to 1/20°or ~5 km)
where necessary, appropriate for local estimates (Kernkamp et al.,
2011). Input for these models are wind speed and direction, and
atmospheric pressure. Results of those models show that the Root
Mean Squared Error between modelled and observed sea level is
less than 0.2 m for 80% of a data set of 472 stations covering the
global coastline (Muis et al., 2016) at 10-minute temporal resolution
over a reference period from 1980-2011. This implies that for most
locations it can be used to describe the variability in ESL. However,
the areas where ESL is dominated by tropical storms are problematic
for hydrodynamical models. Another difficulty arises when these
models are forced with climate models: they inherit the limitations

Chapter 4

(resolution, precision and accuracy) of wind and pressure in climate
projections, which is often insufficient to describe the role of waves.

Statistical models have shown that the estimation of ESL is highly
sensitive to the characterisation of SLR and flood frequency
distributions (Buchanan et al., 2017). This is confirmed by Wahl et al.
(2017) who estimate that the 5-95 percentile uncertainty range,
attained through the application of different statistical extreme
value methods and record lengths, of the current 100-year event is
on average 40 cm, whereas the corresponding range in projected
GMSL of AR5 under RCP8.5 is 37 cm. For ESL events with a higher
return period, differences will be larger. Capturing changes in the ESL
return periods in the future is even more complicated because both
the changing variability over time and the uncertainty in the mean
projection must be combined. A statistical framework to combine
RSL and ESL, based on historical tide gauge data was applied to
the US coastlines (Buchanan et al., 2016). Hunter (2012) and the
AR5 (Church et al., 2013) projected changes in flood frequency
worldwide; however, these analyses used the Gumbel distribution
for high water return periods, which implies that the frequency of
all ESLs (e.g., whether the 1in 10-year or 1 in 500-year) will change
by the same magnitude for a given RSL, an approximation that can
underestimate or overestimate ESL (Buchanan et al., 2017). Hence,
the amplification factors of future storm return frequency in ARS WGI
Figure 13.25 may underestimate flood hazards in some areas, while
overestimating them in others. By using the Gumbel distribution,
Muis et al. (2016) may also inadequately estimate flood frequencies.

4.2.3.4.1 Relative sea level and extreme sea level events based
on tide gauge records

Changes in ESL are presented here, based on the projections as
presented in 4.2.3.2 at the tide gauge locations in the GESLA2
database (Woodworth et al., 2016). Results include GIA effects, but
anthropogenic subsidence is not prescribed. These calculations serve
as a signal to guide adaption to SLR (Stephens et al, 2018). Return
periods are calculated as a combination of regional RSL projections
and a probabilistic characterisation of the variability in sea level as
derived from the GESLA2 data set which contains a quasi-global
set of tide gauges. By doing so, it is assumed that the variability in
the tide gauge record does not change over time. Models are not
accurate enough to address whether this is correct or not.

To quantify the average return period of ESL events, a peak-over-
threshold method is applied following Arns et al. (2013) and Wahl
et al. (2017). Tide gauge records are detrended by subtracting a
running mean of one year. Peaks above the 99th percentile of hourly
water levels are extracted and declustered by applying a minimum
time between peaks of 72 hours. This threshold of 99% was
recommended by Wahl et al. (2017) for global applications. Using
a maximum likelihood estimator, a Generalized Pareto Distribution
(GPD) is fitted to these peaks, allowing for an extrapolation to
return periods beyond the available period of observations. Changes
in ESL events due to regional mean SLR are quantified following
Hunter (2010). Uncertainties in the GPD parameters and projections
are propagated using a Monte Carlo approach, from which a best
estimate is derived (see SM4.2). Only tide gauge records of 20 years

357

 
Chapter 4 Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

 

  
    

 

Extreme sea level (m) Legend Station locations
4.0 :
35 x Observations
«I , == Recent past eo?)
3.04 ()
. Example — RCPIG eo?) e “i .e)
Tl — ROP4.5 © ol
2.04 e
— RCP8.5 U}
154 — Recent past < (g)
Projected of) “
1.044 =
05 — Allowance ot) ot)
, — Amplification Factor
6.0 6.0 6.0

 

 

 

 

5.05 eee 5.04
4.04 40-5 405 ‘SEs

3.0 3.04 3.0 NTE DC OCHS HE

 

 

 

2.04 2.05 2.04
1.04 1.05 1.05
(a) Cuxhaven (b) Lusi (Shanghai) (c) Balboa (Panama City)
0 TTTTy T TUT rrty T roTrrrrTt o TTTTy T TUT rrty T rorerrTTtT o TTTTyT T TUT TT rirty T rorerrrTt
4.0 4.0 4.0

 

 

 

354 354 69

3.04 3.05 3.04
25 255 25

 

20 20 Xt 20-4
154 15 154
1.04 1.04 4.04
05 (d) Buenos Aires 055 (e) New York 055 (f) Zanzibar

 

 

 

 

 

 

24 24 24

 

 

 

 

1.25
0.84 0.85 0.8
0- o4 o4
3 (g) Lautoka (Fiji) 3 (h) Sydney 3 (i) Venice
rrTry T rerererrriy T rererrrrr rrTry T TeTerrrvry T rere rrrt Terry T roeTerrrirry T rererrrTt
2.0 2.0 2.0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0.85
04
(l) Guam
1 10 100
Return period (years) Return period (years) Return period (years)

Figure 4.11 | The relation between expected extreme sea level (ESL) events and return period at a set of characteristic tide gauge locations (see upper left for their
location), referenced to recent past mean sea level, based on observations in the GESLA-2 data base (grey lines) and 2081-2100 conditions for three different RCP
scenarios as presented in Section 4.2.3.2. The grey bands represent the 5—95% uncertainty range in the fit of the extreme value distribution to observations. The upper right
hand panel provides an example illustrating the relationship between ESL events and return period for historical and future conditions; the blue line in this panel shows
the best estimate ESL event above the 1986-2005 reference mean sea level The coloured lines for the different locations show this expected ESL events for different RCP
scenarios. The horizontal line denoting the amplification factor expresses the increase in frequency of events which historically have a return period of once every 100 years.
In the example, a water level of 2.5 m above mean sea level, recurring in the recent climate approximately every 100 years in recent past climate, will occur every
2 to 3 years under future climate conditions. The allowance expresses the increase in ESL for events that historically have a return period of 100 years.

358
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

of longer, which are at least 70% complete, are used. However, as
can be seen for Guam (Fig 4.9), this does not ensure a good fit of
the GPD to all peaks, as rare events may have been captured in this
relatively short record.

Projected changes in ESL events are shown for 12 selected tide gauges
in Figure 4.11. The magnitude of these changes depends on the
relation between ESL events and the associated return periods, as well
as regional sea level projections, and the uncertainty therein (see inset
Figure 4.11). The change in ESL events is commonly expressed in terms
of the amplification factor and the allowance. The amplification factor
denotes the amplification in the average occurrence frequency of a
certain extreme event, often referenced to the water level with a 100-
year return period during the historic period. The allowance denotes
the increased height of the water level with a given return period. This

2046-2065

 

<1 10
Amplification Factor of historical 1-in-100 year extreme sea level event

Chapter 4

allowance equals the regional projection of SLR with an additional
height related to the uncertainty in the projection (Hunter, 2012).

Amplification factors are strongly determined by the local variability
in ESL events. Locations where this variability is large due to large
storm surges and astronomical tides (e.g., Cuxhaven, see Figure 4.9)
will experience a relatively moderate amplification of the occurrence
frequency of extremes. In comparison, locations with small variability
in ESL events (e.g., Lautoka and Papeete) will experience large
amplifications even for a moderate rise in mean sea level (Vitousek
et al. 2017). Globally, this contrast between regions with large
and small amplification factors becomes clear for projections by
mid-century (Fig 4.11, left panels). Although regional differences
in projected mean SLR are small for the coming centuries, regional
contrasts in amplification factors are considerable. In particular,

2081-2100

100 >1000

Figure 4.12 | The colours of the dots express the factor by which the frequency of extreme sea level (ESL) events increase in the future for events which historically have
a return period of 100 years. Hence a value of 50 means that what is currently 1-in-100 year event will happen every 2 years due to a rise in mean sea level. Results are
shown for three RCP scenarios and two future time slices as median values. Results are shown for tide gauges in the GESLA2 database. The accompanying confidence
interval can be found in SM4.2 as well as a list of all locations. The data underlying the graph are identical to those presented in Figure 4.11. The amplification factor is
schematically explained in the upper right panel of figure 4.11. Storm climatology is constant in these projections.

359
 

Chapter 4

many coastal areas in the lower latitudes may expect amplification
factors of 100 or larger by mid-century, regardless of the scenario
as also shown in SR15 and Rasmussen et al. (2018). This indicates
that, at these locations, water levels with return periods of 100 years
during recent past will become annual or more frequent events by
mid-century. By end-century and in particular under RCP8.5, such
amplification factors are widespread along the global coastlines
(Vousdoukas et al., 2018a).

In summary, ESL events estimates as presented in this subsection,
clearly show that as a consequence of SLR, events which are currently
rare (e.g., with an average return period of 100 years), will occur
annually or more frequently at most available locations for RCP8.5
by the end of the century (high confidence). For some locations, this
change will occur as soon as mid-century for RCP8.5 and by 2100 for
all emission scenarios. The affected locations are particularly located
in low-latitude regions, away from the tropical cyclone (TC) tracks.
In these locations, historical sea level variability due to tides and
storm surges is small compared to projected mean SLR. Therefore,
even limited changes in mean sea level will have a noticeable effect
on ESLs, and for some locations, even RCP2.6 will lead to the annual
occurrence of historically rare events by mid-century. Results should
be treated with caution in regions where TCs are important as they
are underrepresented in the observations (Haigh et al., 2014a).

4.2.3.4.2 Waves

A warming climate is expected to affect wind patterns and storm
characteristics, which in turn will impact wind waves that contribute
to high coastal water levels. Wind-wave projections are commonly
based on dynamical and statistical wave models forced by projected
surface winds from GCMs, notably those participating in the CMIP.
In the framework of the Coordinated Ocean Wave Climate Project
(COWCLIP), an ensemble of Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
Phase 3 (CMIP3)-based global wave projections (Hemer et al.,
2013) was produced and the results were summarised in the ARS
(WGI Chapter 13). Casas-Prat et al. (2018) expanded the geographic
domain to include the Arctic Ocean, highlighting the vulnerability of
high-latitude coastlines to wave action as ice retreats. Reduced sea
ice allows larger waves and stronger cyclones in the Arctic Ocean,
which can further disrupt and break up sea ice (e.g., Thomson and
Rogers, 2014; Day and Hodges, 2018). A review and consensus-based
analysis of regional and global scale wave projections, including
CMIP5-based projections, has been provided by Morim et al. (2018)
as part of COWCLIP. Projections of annual and seasonal mean
significant wave height changes agree on an increase in the Southern
Ocean, tropical eastern Pacific and Baltic Sea; and on a decrease over
the North Atlantic, northwestern Pacific and Mediterranean Sea.
Projections of mean significant wave height lack consensus over
the eastern North Pacific and southern Indian and Atlantic Oceans.
Projections of future extreme significant wave height are consistent
in projecting an increase over the Southern Ocean and a decrease
over the northeastern Atlantic and Mediterranean Sea. Regional
projections of wind-waves have mostly been applied to Europe so far,
while highly vulnerable regions have been largely overlooked. This is
the case for low-lying islands where impacts of SLR and wave-induced

360

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

flooding are expected to be severe and adaptive capacity is reduced
(Hoeke et al., 2013; Albert et al., 2016).

A number of studies have included waves, in addition to tides and
sea level anomalies, to assess coastal vulnerability to SLR using
dynamical and statistical approaches. CoSMoS (Barnard et al.,
2014) includes a series of embedded wave models to estimate high
resolution projections of total water levels along the Southern
California coast for different extreme scenarios (O'Neill et al., 2017).
Arns et al. (2017) find that an increase in sea level may reduce the
depth-limitation of waves, thereby resulting in waves with greater
energy approaching the coast. Including wave effects is crucial for
coastal adaptation and planning (eg., Isobe, 2013). For example Arns
et al. (2017) report that coastal protection design heights need to be
increased by 48-56% in the German Bight region relative to a design
height based on the effect of SLR on ESL only. Combining SLR with
extreme value theory applied to past observations of tides, storm
surges and waves, Vitousek et al. (2017) found that a 10-20 cm SLR
could result in a doubling of coastal flooding frequency in the tropics.
For the southern North Sea region, Weisse et al. (2012) argue that
increasing storm activity also increases hazards from ESL events.
Global-scale projections of ESL event changes including wave setup
indicate a very likely increase of the global average 100-year ESL
of 58-172 cm under RCP8.5 (Vousdoukas et al., 2018c). Changes in
storm surges and waves enhance the effects of relative SLR along the
majority of northern European coasts, with contributions up to 40%
in the North Sea (Vousdoukas et al., 2017).

A stationarity of the wave climate is often assumed for projections of
ESL events (Vitousek et al., 2017). Yet, wave contributions to coastal
sea level changes (setup and swash) depend on several factors that
can vary in response to internal climate variability and climate change,
including deep-water wave field, water-depth, and geomorphology.
Melet et al. (2018) reported that over recent decades, wave setup and
swash interannual-to-decadal changes induced by deep-water wave
height and period changes alone were sizeable compared to steric
and land-ice mass loss coastal sea level changes.

Comprehensive broad-scale projections of sea level at the coast
including regional sea level changes, tides, waves, storm surges,
interactions between these processes and accounting for changes in
period and height of waves and frequency and intensity of storm
surges are yet to be performed.

4.2.3.4.3 Effects of cyclones

Tropical and extratropical cyclones (TCs and ETCs) tend to determine
ESL events, such as coastal storm surges, high water events, coastal
floods, and their associated impacts on coastal communities around
the world. The projected potential future changes in TCs and ETCs
frequency, track and intensity is therefore of great importance. After
ARS, it was realised that the modelled global frequency of TCs is
underestimated and that the geographical pattern is poorly resolved
in the case of TC tracks, very intense TCs (i.e, Category 4/5) and
TC formation by using low resolution climate models (Camargo,
2013). Over recent years, multiple methods including downscaling
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

CMIP5 climate models (Knutson et al., 2015; Yamada et al.,
2017), high-resolution simulations (Camargo, 2013; Yamada
et al, 2017), TC-ocean interaction (Knutson et al., 2015;
Yamada et al., 2017), statistical models (Ellingwood and Lee, 2016)
and statistical-deterministic models (Emanuel et al., 2008) have been
developed, and the ability to simulate TCs has been substantially
improved. Most models still project a decrease or constant global
frequency of TCs, but a robust increase in the lifetimes, precipitation,
landfalls and ratio of intense TCs under global warming. This is
consistent with IPCC AR5 and many additional studies (Emanuel
et al., 2008; Holland et al., 2008; Knutson et al., 2015; Kanada et al.,
2017; Nakamura et al., 2017; Scoccimarro et al., 2017; Zheng et al.,
2017). It is expected that these projected increases are intensified
by favourable marine environmental conditions, expansion of the
tropical belt, or ocean warming in the northwest Pacific and north
Atlantic, and increasing water vapour in the atmosphere (Kossin
et al., 2014; Moon et al., 2015; Cai et al, 2016; Mei and Xie, 2016;
Cai et al., 2017; Kossin, 2017; Scoccimarro et al., 2017; Kossin, 2018).
However, it is noted that, in contrast to most models, some models
do predict an increase in global TC frequency during the 21st century
(Emanuel, 2013; Bhatia et al., 2018).

Previous extensive studies indicated the important role of warming
oceans in the TC activity (Emanuel, 2005; Mann and Emanuel, 2006;
Trenberth and Fasullo, 2007; Trenberth and Fasullo, 2008; Villarini
and Vecchi, 2011; Trenberth et al, 2018) and also revealed TCs
stir the ocean and mix the subsurface cold water to the surface
(Shay et al., 1992; Lin et al, 2009). The resulting increased thermal
Stratification of the upper ocean under global warming will reduce
the projected intensification of TCs (Emanuel, 2015; Huang et al.,
2015; Tuleya et al., 2016). A recent study suggests a strengthening
effect of ocean freshening in TC intensification, opposing the thermal
effect (Balaguru et al, 2016). It is concluded that it is /ike/y that the
intensity of severe TCs will increase in a warmer climate, but there
is still fow confidence in the frequency change of TCs in the future.

Recent projection studies indicate that trends in regional ETCs
vary from region to region, for example, a projected increase in the
frequency of ETCs in the South and the northeast North Atlantic, the
South Indian Ocean, and the Pacific (Colle et al, 2013; Zappa et al.,
2013; Cheng et al., 2017; Michaelis et al., 2017) and a decrease in the
numbers of ETCs in the North Atlantic basin and the Mediterranean
(Zappa et al. 2013; Michaelis et al, 2017). Note that the projected
frequency in ETCs still remains uncertain due to different definitions
of cyclone, model biases or climate variability (Chang, 2014; Cheng
et al., 2016). Considering these processes implies that changes in TC
and ETC characteristics will vary locally and therefore there is jow
confidence in the regional storm changes, which is in agreement with
AR5 WGI Chapter 14 (Christensen et al., 2013).

Observed damages from ETCs/TCs to coastal regions has increased
over the past 30 years and will continue in the future (Ranson
et al., 2014). The global population exposed to ETCs/TCs hazards
is expected to continue to increase in a warming climate (Peduzzi
et al., 2012; Bléschl et al., 2017; Emanuel, 2017a; Michaelis et al.,
2017). The probabilities of sea level extreme events induced by TC

Chapter 4

storm surge are very /ikely to increase significantly over the 21st
century. Risk from TCs increases in highly vulnerable coastal regions
(Hallegatte et al., 2013), e.g., on coasts of China (Feng and Tsimplis,
2014), west Florida, north of Queensland, the Persian Gulf, and even
in well protected area such as the Greater Tokyo area (Tebaldi et al.,
2012; Lin and Emanuel, 2015; Ellingwood and Lee, 2016; Hoshino
et al, 2016; Dinan, 2017; Emanuel, 2017b; Lin and Shullman, 2017).
The ESL return period has greatly decreased over recent decades and
is also expected to decrease greatly in the near future, for example,
in NYC (by 2030-2045; Garner et al., 2017). It is very likely that
the ESL return period in low-lying areas such as coastal megacities
decreased over the 20th century and frequencies of still unusual
ESL events are expected to increase in frequency in the future. In
addition, the compound effects of SLR, storm surge and waves on
ESL events and the associated flood hazard are assessed in Chapter 6
(Section 6.3.3.3 and 6.3.4).

4.2.3.5 Long-Term Scenarios, Beyond 2100

Sea level at the end of the century will be higher than present day
and continuing to rise in all cases even if the Paris Agreement is
followed (Nicholls, 2018). The reasons for this are mainly related to
the slow response of glacier melt, thermal expansion and ice sheet
mass loss (Solomon et al., 2009). These processes operate on long
time scales, implying that even if the rise in global temperature slows
or the trend reverses, sea level will continue to rise (SR1.5 report,
ARS). A study by Levermann et al. (2013) based on palaeo-evidence
and physical models formed the basis of the assessment by Church
et al. (2013) indicating that committed SLR is approximately
2.3 m per degree warming for the next 2000 years with respect to
pre-industrial temperatures. This rate is based on a relation between
ocean warming and basal melt as used by Levermann et al. (2013),
without accounting for surface melt, hydrofracturing of ice shelves
and subsequent ice cliff failure, suggested to be a dominant long
term mechanism for ice mass loss (DeConto and Pollard, 2016). Deep
uncertainty (Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1) remains on the ice
dynamical contribution from Antarctica after 2100.

Beyond the 21st century, the relative importance of the long-term
contributions of the various components of SLR changes markedly.
For glaciers, the long-term is of limited importance, because the sea
level equivalent of all glaciers is restricted to 0.32 + 0.08 m when
taking account of ice mass above present day sea level (Farinotti
et al., 2019). Hence, there is high confidence that the contribution
of glaciers to SLR expressed as a rate will decrease over the 22nd
century under RCP8.5 (Marzeion et al., 2012). For thermal expansion
the gradual rate of heat absorption in the ocean will lead to a further
SLR for several centuries (Zickfeld et al., 2017). By far, the most
important uncertainty on long time scales arises from the contribution
of the major ice sheets. The time scale of response of ice sheets is
thousands of years. Hence, if ice sheets contribute significantly to sea
level in 2100, they will necessarily also contribute to sea level in the
centuries to follow. Only for low emission scenarios, like RCP2.6, can
substantial ice loss be prevented, according to ice dynamical models
(Levermann et al., 2014; Golledge et al, 2015; DeConto and Pollard,
2016; Bulthuis et al., 2019). For Greenland, surface warming may lead

361

 
 

Chapter 4

to ablation becoming larger than accumulation, and the associated
surface lowering increases ablation further (positive feedback). As
a consequence, the ice sheet will significantly retreat. Church et al.
(2013) concluded that the threshold for perpetual negative mass
balance based on modelling studies lies between 1°C (Robinson
et al, 2012; low confidence) and 4°C (medium confidence) above
pre-industrial temperatures. Pattyn et al. (2018) demonstrated that
with more than 2.0°C of summer warming, it becomes more likely
than not that the GIS crosses a tipping point, and the ice sheet will
enter a long-term state of decline with the potential loss of most or all
of the ice sheet over thousands of years. If the warming is sustained,
ice loss could become irreversible due to the initiation of positive
feedbacks associated with elevation-SMB feedback (reinforced
surface melt as the ice sheet surface lowers into warmer elevations),
and albedo-melt feedback associated with darkening of the ice
surface due to the presence of liquid water, loss of snow, changes in
firn and biological processes (Tedesco et al., 2016; Ryan et al., 2018).
The precise temperature threshold and duration of warming required
to trigger such irreversible retreat remains very uncertain, and more
research is still needed.

The mechanisms for decay of the AIS are related to ice shelf melt by
the ocean, followed by accelerated loss of grounded ice and MISI,
possibly exacerbated by hydrofracturing of the ice shelves and ice
cliff failure (Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3). The latter processes
have the potential to drive faster rates of ice mass loss than the
SMB processes that are /ikely to dominate the future loss of ice
on Greenland. Furthermore, the loss of marine-based Antarctic ice
represents a long-term (millennial) commitment to elevated SLR, due
to the long thermal memory of the ocean. Once marine based Antarctic
ice is lost, local ocean temperatures will have to cool sufficiently
for buttressing ice shelves to reform, allowing retreated grounding
lines to re-advance (DeConto and Pollard, 2016). A minimum time
scale, whereby the majority of West Antarctica decays, was derived
from a schematic experiment with an ice flow model by Golledge
et al. (2017), where ice shelves were removed instantaneously and
prohibited from re-growing. Results of this experiment indicate that
most of West Antarctica’s ice is lost in about a century.

Gradual melt of ice shelves accompanied by partial retreat of East
Antarctic ice would yield greater ice melt but on a time scale of
millennial or longer (Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3). Prescribing
a uniform warming of 2°C-3°C in the Southern Ocean triggers an
accelerated decay of West Antarctica in a coarse resolution model
with a temperature-driven basal melt formulation yielding 1-2 m
SLR by the year 3000 and up to 4 m by the year 5000 (Sutter et al,
2016). Formulating an ice sheet model with Coulomb friction in the
grounding line zone yields a SLR of 2 m after 500 year for a sub-ice
shelf melt of 20 m a“! (Pattyn, 2017). On decadal to millennial time
scales the interaction between ice and the solid Earth indicates the
possibility of a negative feedback slowing retreat by viscoelastic
uplift and gravitational effects that reduce the water depth at the
grounding line (Gomez et al., 2010; de Boer et al., 2014; Gomez et al.,
2015; Konrad et al., 2015; Pollard et al., 2017; Barletta et al, 2018;
Section 4.2.3.1.2).

362

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

A blended statistical and physical model, calibrated by observed
recent ice loss in a few basins (Ritz et al, 2015) projects an Antarctic
contribution to sea level of 30 cm by 2100 and 72 cm by 2200,
following the SRES A1B scenario, roughly comparable to RCP6.0.
The projected contribution of WAIS was found to be limited to 48 cm
in 2200 following the A1B scenario. The key uncertainty in these
calculations comes from the dependency on the relation between the
sliding velocity and the friction at the ice-bedrock interface. Several
parameterisations are used to describe this process. Golledge et al.
(2015) present values between 0.6-3 m by 2300 for the RCP8.5
scenario. In contrast to the previous studies, Cornford et al. (2015)
used an adaptive grid model, which can describe more accurately
grounding line migration (Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3). Due
to the computational complexity of their model, simulations are
limited to West Antarctica. Starting from present-day observations,
they find that the results are critically dependent on initial conditions,
sub ice shelf melt rates, and grid resolution. The glacier with the
most uncertain vulnerability is the 120 km-wide Thwaites Glacier,
in the Amundsen Sea sector of West Antarctica. Thwaites Glacier is
currently retreating in a reverse-sloped trough extending into the
central WAIS (Figure 4.8), where the bed is up to 2 km below sea
level. In addition to Thwaites, several smaller outlet glaciers and ice
streams may contribute to sea level on long time scales, but in the
study by Cornford et al. (2015), a full West Antarctic retreat does
not occur with limited oceanic heating under the two major ice
shelves (Filchner-Ronne and Ross) keeping ice streams flowing into
the Ross and Weddell Seas in place. However, the representation of
these processes remains simplistic at the continental ice sheet scale
(Cross-Chapter Box 8 in Chapter 3).

Nonetheless, recent studies using independently developed Antarctic
ice dynamical models (Golledge et al., 2015; DeConto and Pollard,
2016; Bulthuis et al., 2019) agree that low emission scenarios, are
required to prevent substantial future ice loss (medium confidence).
However, observations (Rignot et al, 2014) and modelling of the
Thwaites Glacier in West Antarctica (Joughin et al, 2014), suggest
grounding line retreat on the glacier's reverse sloped bedrock is
already underway and possibly capable of driving major WAIS
retreat on century time scales. Whether the retreat is driven by ocean
changes driven by climate change or by climate variability (Jenkins
et al., 2018) is still under debate. Hence it is not possible to determine
whether a low emission scenario would prevent substantial future
ice loss (medium confidence). This is a further elaboration on the
SR15 assertion that the chance for passing a threshold is larger for
2°C warming than for 1.5°C warming.

A study by Clark et al. (2016) addresses the evolution of the ice
sheets over the next 10,000 years and concludes that given a climate
model with an equilibrium climate sensitivity of 3.5°C, the estimated
combined loss of Greenland and Antarctica ranges from 25-52 m of
equivalent sea level, depending on the emission scenario considered,
with rates of GMSL as high as 2-4 m per century. A worst-case
scenario was explored with an intermediate complexity climate
model coupled to a dynamical ice model (Winkelmann et al., 2015), in
which all readily available fossil fuels are combusted at present-day
rates until they are exhausted. The associated climate warming leads
to the disappearance of the entire AlS with rates of SLR up to around
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

3 m per century. A follow up study by Clark et al. (2018) addressing
the long-term commitment of SLR based on cumulative carbon
dioxide emissions points to SLR as an additional measure for setting
emission targets. It shows that a 2°C scenario would result in 0.9 m
in 2300 and around 7.4 m in the year 9000 CE.

Similar to the strategy for the 21st century, the long-term projections
of sea level were assessed. Since no new CMIP runs are available
there are no major new insights in the thermal expansion and
glacier component which deviate from the AR5 assessment for the
long-term contribution of these components. Some studies updated
the contribution of the GIS on long time scales. Vizcaino et al. (2015)
used a GCM coupled to an ice sheet model to calculate the Greenland
contribution which is within the range of estimates presented by
Church et al. (2013). This is also true for the ice sheet simulations
by Calov et al. (2018) which are based on off line simulations with
a regional climate model forced by RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios of
three different CMIP5 models. On the other hand, Aschwanden et al.
(2019) used temperatures to calculate SMB which was used to force
an ice sheet model to arrive at much higher values for SLR. However,
they used a spatially uniform temperature forcing, which is in conflict
with earlier work and overestimated temperatures in the ablation
zone (e.g., Van de Wal and Wild, 2001; Gregory and Huybrechts,
2006). Given this limited and contrasting evidence for Greenland,
the assessed values presented in Table 13.8 of Church et al. (2013)
were also used, but again replacing the Antarctic component by the
assessed value from the process and climate scenario-based studies
published after 2013. The low scenario in Table 13.8 of Church et al.
(2013) without the Antarctic contribution was combined with the
RCP2.6 estimates for Antarctica simulated by Golledge et al. (2015),
the mean of the RCP2.6 simulations with and without time delay
between global mean atmosphere and ocean temperature around
Antarctica of Levermann et al. (2014), and the model results of
Bulthuis et al. (2019). The medium scenario from Church et al. (2013)
is combined with RCP4.5 results and the high scenario with RCP8.5.
Results are shown in Figure 4.2, Section 4.1 and show a strong

Chapter 4

divergence of RSL rise over time, whereby the estimates in 2300
range from about 1-2 m under RCP2.6 up to 2-5.5 m for RCP8.5.

The specific trajectories that will be followed may depend critically
on if and when certain tipping points are reached. Most critical in
that respect are presumably the tipping points corresponding (1) to
the threshold where the ablation in Greenland becomes larger than
the accumulation, causing an irreversible and nearly full retreat of
the ice sheet; and (2) the thresholds for ice shelf stability in West
Antarctica, which depend on surface melt and sub-ice melt, combined
with uncertainties surrounding MIS! and/or MICI. There is deep
uncertainty about whether and when a tipping point will be passed.
For RCP8.5, the chance of passing a tipping-point are considered to
be substantially higher than for RCP2.6.

In summary, there is high confidence in continued thermal expansion
and the loss of ice from both the GIS and AIS sheets beyond 2100.
A complete loss of Greenland ice contributing about 7 m to sea
level over a millennium or more would occur for sustained GMST
between 1°C (low confidence) and 4°C (medium confidence) above
pre-industrial levels. Due to deep uncertainties regarding the dominant
processes that could trigger a major retreat, there is fow confidence
in the estimates of the contribution of the AlS beyond 2100, but our
estimates (2.3-5.4 m in 2300) for RCP8.5 are considerably higher
than presented in AR5. High-emission scenarios or exhaustion of
fossil fuels over a multi-century period lead to rates of SLR as high
as several metres per century in the long term (fow confidence).
Low-emission scenarios lead to a limited contribution over
multi-century time scales (high confidence). Discriminating between
1.5°C and 2°C scenarios in terms of long-term sea level change is not
possible with the limited evidence. Hence, it is concluded that the
SLR on millennial time scales is strongly dependent on the emission
scenario followed. This, combined with the lack in predictability
of the tipping points, indicates the importance of emissions
mitigation for minimising the risk to low-lying coastlines and islands
(high confidence).

Box 4.1| Case Studies of Coastal Hazard and Response

 

This box illustrates current coastal flood risk management and adaptation practices through four case studies from around the world,
showing how current approaches could be refined using the new seal level rise (SLR) projections of this report, as well as findings on
adaptation options, decision making approaches and governance (called Practice Consistent with SROCC Assessment in Tables 1-3).
In an effort to illustrate some of the diverse social-ecological settings in this report, the locations are Nadi in Fiji, the Nile delta in Egypt,
New York and Shanghai. The latter two studies are framed as a comparison. For each case, Current Practice reflects understanding,
policy planning, and implementation that existed prior to SROCC. Recent improvements in understanding documented in this chapter
suggest that significant, beneficial changes in the basis for design and planning are feasible in each case for addressing future risk.

Responding to Coastal Flooding and Inundation, Nadi, Fiji

Hazards that contribute to riverine flooding and coastal inundation for Nadi Town and the wider Nadi Basin are heavy rainfall, elevated
sea levels and subsidence of the delta. People and built assets in the Nadi River floodplain are already being affected by climate
change. Observed sea level shows an increase of 4 mm yr! over the period 1992-2018. Over the past 75 years, extreme rainfall
events have become more frequent. Of the 84 floods which occurred in the Nadi River Basin since 1870, 54 were post 1980, with
26 major floods since 1991 (Hay, 2017). In January 2009, large areas of Fiji were inundated by devastating floods which claimed
at least 11 lives, left 12,000 people temporarily homeless and caused 54 million USD in damage. Worst hit was the Nadi area, with
total damage estimated at 39 million USD (Hay, 2017). The increased frequency of flooding is not all attributable to increases in sea
level and extreme rainfall events. River channels have become filled with sediment over time, largely owing to deforestation of the

363
Chapter 4 Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Box 4.1 (continued)

Extreme sea level (m)}

 

(a) Burullus (Alexandria) (b) Lautoka (Fiji)

Legend

> Observations
— Recent past
— RCP2.6 4
— RCP4.5

— RCP8.5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6.0
55

(c) New York (d) Lusi (Shanghai)
50 4

457

 

40

357

 

3.04 4

 

20 ¢ % a

 

 

 

 

 

1 10 100 1 10 100
Return period (years) Return period (years)

 

Box 4.1, Figure 1 | Historical and projected extreme sea level (ESL) events at four stations discussed in this box. The heights of ESL events are shown as a function
of their return period. Observations (crosses) are derived from tide-gauge records. The historical return height (grey) is the best fit through these observations, and the
5-95% confidence intervals (grey band) are shown. Note that the confidence interval for Lautoka is too narrow to be visible. Future ESL events represent the effect
of regional sea level change for the period 2081-2100 for scenarios RCP2.6 (blue) and RCP8.5 (red). The increased height of the 100-year event for scenario RCP2.6
and RCP8.5 is 0.43 m and 0.80 m respectively for Burullus; 0.55 m and 1.03 m for Lautoka; 0.63 m and 1.04 m for New York; and 0.44 m and 0.79 m for Lusi. The
increased frequency of the historical 100-year event for scenario RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 is a factor of 15 and 777 for Burullus; >1200 and >1200 for Lautoka; 67 and
541 for New York; and 6 and 26 for Lusi. The notation >1200 indicates that the methodology allows for estimation of only a lower bound on the increased frequency.

hinterland. Much of the mangrove fringe has been sacrificed for development of various kinds. The Nadi River Delta is subsiding,
exacerbating the effects of SLR (Chandra and Gaganis, 2016). Various initiatives to help alleviate flooding and inundation in the Nadi
Basin have been proposed. These include both hard protection and engineering (e.g., ring dikes, river widening, bridge rebuilding,
retarding basins, shortcutting tributaries, dams and diversion channels) and accommodation (e.g., early flood warnings and improved
land management practices in upper basin) measures (Box 4.1, Table 1).

A Comparison of New York City and Shanghai Coastal Flood Adaptation Measures

Hurricane Sandy (2012) and Typhoon Winnie (1997) are considered the largest recorded historical flood events for New York City
and Shanghai, respectively (Xian et al., 2018). Hurricane Sandy killed 55 people in New York City and neighbouring states and caused
over 19 billion USD losses to New York City (Rosenzweig and Solecki, 2014). Typhoon Winnie killed more than 310 people and

364
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities Chapter 4

Box 4.1 (continued)

Box 4.1, Table 1 | Current coastal flood risk management and adaptation practices in the Nadi Basin and possible refinements using the new SLR and ESL
projections of this report, as well as findings on adaptation options, decision making approaches and governance (Practice Consistent with SROCC Assessment). See
Hay (2017) for background on current practice and practice consistent with SROCC assessment; see Box 4.1, Figure 1 for ESL event values. VLM is vertical land motion.

Current practise Practise consistent with SROCC Assessment

 

Design storm tide and design two-day rainfall used for existing Design storm tide in 2081-2100 {100-yr ESL): 1.9 m and 2.4 m {RCP2.6
Hazards flood control works: 1.2 m and 436 mm, respectively. Subsidence: and RCP8.5); Two-day design rainfall, (100-yr event): 670 mm {RCP8.5);
Not considered. Subsidence and other VLM considered.
Exposure and vulnerability assessed for the present day and future time
Exposure and Exposure and vulnerability assessed for present day only; thus static, Pt " . wu . 'v a, p ¥ ue
a: . . periods, with the projections taking into account both biophysical and human
Vulnerability with no reference to drivers.

drivers, drawing on community-based assessments (Sections 4.3, 4.4.4.2).

 

Use risk scenarios reflecting the full suite of biophysical and socioeconomic
changes over the life of the planned investment project, including their
interactions {Section 4.4.4.3).

Reflect current levels of risk, with no allowance for changes

Levels of Risk Co | . . _
in climatic, biophysical or socioeconomic conditions.

 

Interventions based entirely on reducing current levels of risk, Consider locally appropriate, sequenced mix of hard, soft and
Response Options with the primary focus on hard protection measures to reduce ecosystem-based measures to reduce risks expected to occur over the lifetime
flood hazard. of the investment (Sections 4.4.2, 4.4.4.3).

 

Take into account vulnerability and equity implications, and use
community-based approaches (Section 4.4.5). Responses reflect a risk-based,
flexible design approach that addresses the tension between a fixed design
standard on the one hand and, on the other hand, increasing flood risk over
time due to further floodplain development, climate change leading to higher
peak flows and inundation, and river channel bed aggradation.

Responses take a narrow ‘flood control’ approach aimed at
‘controlling’ single hazards, rather than managing the multiple
and interacting risks in their broader contexts.

Planning and
Decision Making

 

A comprehensive ‘Flood Management Strategy and Plan’ for the Nadi River
Basin would be one way to achieve the desired complementarity between
hard, soft and accommodation measures. Strengthening of policies on water

Nadi Town Drainage Plan completed in August 2000. Aimed
to address drainage problems and reduce flood damage.

Governance However, the Plan was developed without distinction between ; Co
aoe . . . . . and land management, as well as addressing related legal and institutional
and Institutional inland water and river water, without hydraulic analysis and . . ,
. . wees . caps . . issues, could be undertaken at the national, basin and local levels.
Dimensions verification, and without a scientific basis. Retention dams were

Government, civil society, indigenous iTaukei Fijians, and the private sector,
have valuable contributions to make in preparing an integrated approach
to flood and coastal hazard risk reduction (Section 4.4.5).

constructed, but other initiatives in the plan have not seen
substantive implementation.

 

 

 

 

 

 

caused damage exceeding 3.2 billion USD in China. Many dikes and floodwalls along coastal Shanghai and Zhejiang were breached
by surge-driven floodwaters (Gu, 2005).

Past updates of the flood defences in Shanghai occurred after extreme flood events (i.e., typhoons in 1962, 1974 and 1981; Xian et al.,
2018). In contrast, the flood tide of Hurricane Sandy stands out in the record at the Battery tide gauge. Unlike the numerous episodes of
severe inundation experienced by Shanghai, NYC suffered relatively moderate consequences from individual events before Hurricane
Sandy. This and other factors led to higher-standard flood protection measures in Shanghai, such as sea walls designed to protect its
coastlines and critical infrastructure in developed areas against a 200-year (0.005 annual chance) flood level, and flood walls with
1000-year (0.001 annual chance) riverine flood return level along the Huangpu River. New York City, on the other hand, has relatively
low protection, consisting of sandy dunes (e.g., on Staten Island), vegetation (e.g., in Queens) and low-rise sea walls or bulkheads in
lower Manhattan. Another reason why Shanghai has repeatedly updated its flood protection while New York City failed to do so lies in
their differing governance structures (Wei and Leung, 2005; Yin et al., 2011; Rosenzweig and Solecki, 2014), as well as rapid economic
growth in China, providing funding for large-scale infrastructure (Zhang, 2003).

Since Hurricane Sandy in 2012, implementation of the ‘Big U’ project, a coastal protection system for lower Manhattan, has begun,
and a variety of measures are planned, and some undertaken, to protect the subway system to a flood level of 4.3 m above street level
(Jacob Balter, 2017; MTA, 2017). Newly built critical facilities will be located outside the flood zone and siting guidelines for publicly
financed projects in the current and future flood zones have been tightened (New York City Mayor's Office of Recovery and Resiliency,
2019). The degree to which these protection projects will be completed and the guidelines enforced remains uncertain. Home buyouts
have enabled some permanent relocation away from hazardous areas, but relocation impacts on social networks and place-based ties
hamper long-term recovery (Binder et al., 2019; Buchanan et al., 2019).

365
Chapter 4 Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Box 4.1 (continued)

Box 4.1, Table 2 | Current coastal flood risk management and adaptation practices in New York City and Shanghai and possible refinements using the new sea
level rise (SLR) and extreme sea level (ESL) projections of this report, as well as findings on adaptation options, decision making approaches and governance (Practice
Consistent with SROCC Assessment). See Xian et al. (2018) for background on current practice and practice consistent with SROCC assessment. See Box 4.1, Figure 1
for ESL event values. EbA is ecosystem-based adaptation.

Catt ccimac rata) Practice Consistent with SROCC Assessment

Design storm tide: 4.6 m (200-yr ESL) Shanghai vs 2.1m (100-
yr event) NYC;

Subsidence + GIA ~5-7 mm yr Shanghai vs 1-1.5 mm yr
NYC

Design storm tide in 2081-2100: 5.1 and 5.5 m (200-yr ESL) Shanghai
vs 2.8 and 3.2 m (100-yr ESL) NYC {RCP2.6 and RCP8.5); Subsidence
could significantly increase these values for Shanghai.

Hazards

 

Exposure and vulnerability for current and future time periods would
take into account projections that consider both biophysical and human
drivers {Section 4.3.3).

Current exposure and vulnerability considers topographic

Exposure and Vulnerabili . .
mI y elevation and human drivers.

 

Use risk scenarios to reflect the full suite of climate change and socio-
economic changes and their interdependency for the planned coastal
projects (Section 4.4.4.3); use freeboard that accounts for ESL uncer-
tainty, such as ESL with probability >5% during planning horizon.

Reflect current hazard plus various freeboard for NYC; 0.5 m
Levels of Risk for Shanghai, with no consideration of changes to date in
storm characteristics and socioeconomic factors.

 

Protection measures: fixed-height sea wall for both NYC and
Shanghai; for NYC: building retrofit, ecosystem-based mea-
sures such as dune enhancement. Accommodation measures
for NYC: insurance, building codes.

Consider locally appropriate, sequenced mix of hard protection, EbA,
accommodation and retreat measures to minimise combined total costs;
more flexible design that reflects the dynamic risk (Section 4.4.2).

Response Options

 

Flexible adaptation responses to uncertain long-term risk facilitate SLR

 

 

 

 

 

Planning and Decision Funding and governance issues slow down long-term plan- planning and implementation (Section 4.4.4.3). Take into account vul-
Making ning and implementation process, especially for NYC. nerability and equity implications, and continuously involve stakeholders
in locally appropriate ways.
Shanghai has relatively high autonomy in China context More effective coordination of planning, finance, and transparency
Governance and Institutional and alignment of central and local Governments’ objectives; among local, regional, and national government agencies, and between
Dimensions NYC’s decision making occurs in context of city-to-national government, civil society, and the private sector, enables response to
multi-level governance. increasing risks (Section 4.4.5).

 

Climate Change Adaptation in Nile Delta Regions of Egypt

Coastal hazard for the Nile delta arises because large portions lie only +1.5 m above sea level (Shaltout et al., 2015) and while the
Delta includes only 2% of Egypt's total area, it held 41% of its population as of 2006 (Hereher, 2010; World Bank, 2017) and is key
to Egypt's economy (Bucx et al., 2010). The delta is an important resource for Egypt's fish farms (Hereher, 2009; El-Sayed, 2016) and
contains more than 63% of Egypt's cultivated lands (Hereher, 2010). The Nile Delta’s coastal lagoons are internationally renowned
for abundant bird life, account for one fourth of Mediterranean wetlands and 60% of Egypt's fish catch (Government of Egypt, 2016).
Coastal flooding and salinisation of freshwater lagoons would negatively affect fisheries and biodiversity (UNDP, 2017).

 

The Nile Delta’s low elevation translates into high exposure to SLR (Shaltout et al, 2015), and the level of protection varies greatly
from place to place (Frihy et al., 2010). Box 4.1, Figure 1 indicates that episodic flooding will increase substantially without effective
adaptation measures. An estimated 2660 km? in the northern delta will be inundated by 2100 for GMSL of 0.44 m (Gebremichael
et al., 2018; low confidence), which is comparable to the RCP2.6 emission scenario. In addition, subsidence due to sediment diversion
by the Aswan High Dam, water and natural gas extraction (Gebremichael et al., 2018) and some other critical natural aspects (Frihy
et al., 2010) heightens vulnerability to coastal flooding (Box 4.1, Table 3) and reduces fresh water supply to the delta. Subsidence
rates range from 0.4 mm yr in the west delta to 1.1 mm yr in the mid-delta and 3.4 mm yr in the east delta (Elshinnawy et al.,
2010), although rates as high as 10 mm yr near natural gas extraction operations are also reported (Gebremichael et al., 2018).
While there is ow confidence in reported values, these indicate that subsidence makes locally a substantial contribution to RSL. Future
construction of Ethiopia’s Grand Renaissance Dam (Stanley and Clemente, 2017) may heighten problems of fresh water availability
and reduce hydropower production.

The low-lying northern coast and Nile Delta region are a high priority for adaptation to climate change (UNDP, 2017). The Egyptian
government has committed 200 million USD to hard coastal protection at Alexandria and adopted integrated coastal zone management
for the northern coast. Recent activities include integrating SLR risks within adaptation planning for social-ecological systems, with special
focus on coastal urban areas, agriculture, migration and other human security dimensions (Government of Egypt, 2016; UNDP. 2017).

366
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Box 4.1 (continued)

Chapter 4

Box 4.1, Table 3 | Current coastal flood risk management and adaptation practices in the Nile Delta and possible refinements using the new sea level rise (SLR) and
extreme sea level (ESL) projections of this report, as well as findings on adaptation options, decision making approaches and governance (Practice Consistent with
SROCC Assessment). See Elshinnawy et al. (2010) and text above for data sources for current practice. See Box 4.1, Figure 1 for ESL event values.

Ceniccimecra tla) Practice Consistent with SROCC Assessment

Hazards

Design storm tide unclear; 0.9m corresponds
to current 100-yr ESL.

Tide gauge trends: 1.6-5.3 mm yr.
Subsidence: 0.4-10 mm yr.

Design storm tide in 2081-2100: 1.4 and 1.7 m
{100-yr ESL; RCP2.6 and RCP8.5);
Subsidence: 0.4-10 mm yr

 

Exposure and Vulnerability

High coastal flood risk, especially affecting coastal
cities, fisheries, farming and ecosystems (UNDP, 2017).
Frameworks under development to assess future risk.

Full assessment of current and future exposure and vulnerability
scenarios to account for interactions of changing demographic, industrial,
and ecological characteristics of the Delta, especially with respect to
agricultural land, fisheries, and coastal cities (UNDP, 2017; Section 4.3).

 

Levels of Risk

Risk is high and has increased due to regional SLR and
subsidence. (UNDP, 2017). Highly variable protection against
current risk.

Use plausible risk scenarios, including regional sea level trends and
possibly subsidence that could lead to higher flood levels (UNDP, 2017)
for potentially exposed and vulnerable communities.

 

Response Options

Unconnected and small incremental steps toward increasing
management capability in Egypt to confront coastal flood risks
associated with SLR, including enhancing planning paradigms,
interventions that account for climate change threats,
community-based measures, and adaptation and improving
resilience {UNDP 2017).

Consideration and deployment of a sequenced mix of tailor-made
options, including hard protection, ecosystem-based measures, advance,
and retreat. Comprehensive monitoring and evaluation of effectiveness
of measures. Timing of suitable options a key aspect (Section 4.4.4.3).

 

Planning and

“One of the most prominent obstacles to integrated coastal
Zone management in Egypt is the complex and sometimes
unclear institutional framework for addressing development

An adaptation based coastal planning approach able to manage
the range of climatic risks on both natural and built environments
that will cover hard protection (Ghoneim et al., 2015), accommodation

Decision Making

different agencies” (UNDP, 2017).

activities; the limited and often ad-hoc approach between

and ecosystem-based measures (UNDP. 2017), involving potentially
transformational approaches that take dynamic long term risk into
account {UNDP 2017; Sections 4.4.2, 4.4.4).

 

Governance and Institutional
Dimensions

 

 

Some recent projects and proposals aim to “integrate the
management of SLR risks into the development of Egypt’s Low
Elevation Coastal Zone {LECZ) in the Nile Delta” {UNDP 2017).

Mainstream long-term SLR risk into all elements of decision making
that directly or indirectly affect the Nile Delta (4.4.5). Strengthen
coordination of SLR-relevant provisions across scales, sectors and policy
domains, including arrangements to involve government, civil society,
science and the private sector (Section 4.4.5).

 

 

 

4.3 Exposure, Vulnerability, Impacts
and Risk Related to Sea Level Rise
4.3.1 Introduction

Section 4.2 demonstrates that sea level is rising and accelerating over
time, and that it will continue to rise throughout the 21st century and
for centuries beyond. It also shows that ESL events that are historically
rare, will become common by 2100 under all emission scenarios, leading
to severe flooding in the absence of ambitious adaptation efforts (high
confidence). In both RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 emission scenarios, many
low-lying coastal areas at all latitudes will experience such events
annually by 2050. In this context, Section 4.3 updates knowledge on
the recent methodological advances in exposure and vulnerability
assessments (Box 4.2), dimensions of exposure and vulnerability
(Section 4.3.2) and observed and projected impacts (Section 4.3.3).
It concludes with a synthesis on future risks to illustrative low-lying
coastal geographies (resource-rich coastal cities, urban atoll island,
large tropical agricultural deltas and Arctic communities), and
according to various adaptation scenarios (Section 4.3.4).

4.3.2 Dimensions of Exposure and Vulnerability
to Sea Level Rise
4.3.2.1 Point of Departure
4.3.2.1.1 Environmental dimension of exposure and vulnerability

Exposure of coastal natural ecosystems to RSL and related coastal
hazards change by two means: alterations in the spatial coverage
and distribution of ecosystems within the potentially exposed
area; and changes in the size of the exposed area caused by
relative SLR. The vulnerability of coastal ecosystems to SLR and
related coastal hazards differs strongly across ecosystem types
and depends on human interventions (e.g., land use change and
fragmentation, coastal squeeze and anthropogenic subsidence) and
degradation (eg., pollution), as well as climate change, including
changes in temperature and precipitation patterns. SLR and its
physical impacts, such as flooding or salinisation, also increase
ecosystems’ vulnerability and decrease the ecosystems’ ability to
support livelihoods and provide ecosystem services such as coastal
protection. Healthy, diverse, connected coastal ecosystems support

367

 
Chapter 4 Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Box 4.2 | Methodological Advances in Exposure and Vulnerability Assessments

This box highlights recent advances in methodologies in assessing exposure and vulnerability to sea level rise (SLR) and its physical
impacts, such as coastal flooding since the IPCC 5th Assessment Report (ARS). In few cases it also leverages methodological advances,
which have not been yet applied in the coastal context but have great potential to inform coastal assessments.

Improved spatial-temporal exposure assessments

Exposure assessment is frequently based on census data, which is available at coarse resolutions. However, new technologies
(eg., drones and mobile phone data) and more available satellite products provide new tools for exposure analysis. Exposure
assessment is increasingly based on the combination of high resolution satellite imagery and spatio-temporal population modelling
as well as improved quality of digital elevation models (DEM; Kulp and Strauss, 2017). This is used to understand better exposure to
coastal flooding (Kulp and Strauss, 2017), diurnal differences in flood risk exposure (Smith et al., 2016), dynamic gridded population
information for daily and seasonal differences in exposure (Renner et al., 2017), a combination of remotely-sensed and geospatial
data with modelling for a gridded prediction of population density at ~100 m spatial resolution (Stevens et al., 2015), or open building
data using building locations, footprint areas and heights (Figueiredo and Martina, 2016). In addition, methods based on mobile
phone data (Deville et al, 2014; Ahas et al., 2015), and social media-based participation are increasingly available for population
distribution mapping (Steiger et al., 2015). Some of these methodologies have been already applied in coastal assessments (Smith
et al., 2016). Integrating daily and seasonal changes with the distribution of population improves population exposure information for
risk assessments especially in areas with highly dynamic population distributions, as shown in high tourism areas in mountain regions
(eg., Renner et al., 2017), which would have advantages at touristic coastal areas as well.

Projections of future exposure

Recent studies assess exposure considering not only projected sea levels but also expected changes in population size (Jongman et al.,
2012; Hauer et al., 2016). It involves different socioeconomic scenarios together with changing growth rates for coastal areas and
the hinterland (Neumann et al., 2015) and using spatially explicit simulation models for urban, residential and rural areas (Sleeter
et al., 2017). Migration-based changes in population distribution (Merkens et al., 2016; Hauer, 2017) are also considered, as well as
simulated future land use (specifically urban growth) to investigate future exposure to SLR (Song et al., 2017). Other studies assess
future exposure trends by accounting for the role of varying patterns of topography and development projections leading to different
rates of anticipated future exposure (Kulp and Strauss, 2017), which influence how effectively coastal communities can adapt. Recent
studies aim to account for the sociodemographic characteristics of potentially exposed future populations (Shepherd and Binita,
2015), and anticipate future risk by projecting the evolution of the exposure of vulnerable populations and groups (Hardy and Hauer,
2018). Using social heterogeneity modelling when developing future exposure scenarios enhances the quality of risk assessments
in coastal areas (Rao et al., 2017; Hardy and Hauer, 2018). Subnational population dynamics combined with an extended coastal
narrative-based version of the five shared socioeconomic pathways (SSP) for global coastal population distribution was used for
assessing global climate impacts at the coast, highlighting regions where high coastal population growth is expected and which
therefore face increased exposure to coastal flooding (Merkens et al., 2016). SSPs have also been used to estimate future population
in regional coastal-hazard risk exposure studies (Vousdoukas et al, 2018b).

 

Advances in vulnerability assessment

Since the IPCC Special Report on Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters (SREX) report, vulnerability has been
more consistently considered in climate risk assessments (medium confidence). It is recognised that climate risk is not only
hazard-driven, but also a sociopolitical and economic phenomenon that evolves with changing societal and institutional conditions
(high confidence). Many studies related to climate risk and adaptation include vulnerability assessments, most of them considering
vulnerability as a pre-existing condition while some interpret vulnerability as an outcome (Jurgilevich et al., 2017).

Increasing importance of dynamic assessments

The dynamic nature of vulnerability, and the need to align climate forecasts with socioeconomic scenarios, was a key message of
IPCC SREX. Challenges in methodology and data availability, particularly of future socioeconomic data is overcome by extrapolating
empirical information of past trends in vulnerability to flooding (Jongman et al., 2015; Mechler and Bouwer, 2015; Kreibich et al.,
2017), downscaling global scenarios, for example, the SSPs (Van Ruijven et al., 2014; Viguié et al., 2014; Absar and Preston, 2015),
or by using participatory methods, surveys and interviews to develop future scenarios (Ordéfiez and Duinker, 2015; Tellman et al.,
2016). The uncertainty of the downscaled projections needs to be considered along with the limitation that, even if population
data projections are available, the future level of education, poverty, etc. is hard to predict (Jurgilevich et al., 2017). Suggestions
to overcome these shortcomings entail the use of a combination of different data sources for triangulation and inclusion of
uncertainties (Hewitson et al., 2014), or the meaningful involvement of stakeholders to project plausible future socioeconomic

368
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities Chapter 4

Box 4.2 (continued)

conditions through co-production (Jurgilevich et al., 2017). Recent innovations in (flood) risk assessment include the integration of
behaviour into risk assessments (Aerts et al., 2018b) as well as vulnerabilities related to cascading events (Serre and Heinzlef, 2018).

Social-ecological vulnerability assessments

Especially in rural, natural resource-dependent settings, where the population directly rely on the services provided by ecosystems, the
vulnerability of the ecosystems (e.g., fragmented, degraded ecosystems with low biodiversity) directly influence that of the population.
Since AR5, several methods have been developed and piloted to assess and map social-ecological vulnerability. Examples include
the use of i) the sustainable livelihood approach and resource dependence metrics for Australian coastal communities (Metcalf
et al., 2015), ii) integration of local climate forecasts for coral reef fisheries in Papua New Guinea (Maina et al., 2016), iii) ecosystem
supply-demand model for an integrated vulnerability assessment in Rostock, Germany (Beichler, 2015), iv) participatory indicator
development for multiple hazards in river deltas (Hagenlocher et al., 2018), and v) human-nature dependencies and ecosystem
services for small-scale fisheries in French Polynesia (Thiault et al., 2018). Areas, where social vulnerability prevail may be, but are not
necessarily associated with hotspots of ecosystem vulnerability, highlighting the need to specifically adapt management interventions
to local social-ecological settings and to adaptation goals (Hagenlocher et al, 2018; Thiault et al., 2018). The number of assessments
considering both the social and the ecological part of the system are increasingly used (Sebesvari et al., 2016).

Assessment of vulnerability to multiple hazards simultaneously

Increasingly, multi-hazard risk assessments are undertaken at the coast (e.g., flooding and inundation of coastal lands in India; Kunte
et al, 2014), to understand the inter-relationships between hazards (e.g., Gill and Malamud, 2014), and by focusing on hazard
interactions where one hazard triggers another or increases the probability of others occurring. Liu et al. (2016a) provide a systematic
hazard interaction classification based on the geophysical environment that allows for the consideration of all possible interactions
(independent, mutex, parallel and series) between different hazards, and for the calculation of the probability and magnitude of
multiple interacting natural hazards occurring together. Advances have been reported since AR5 by using, for example, modular sets
of vulnerability indicators, flexibly adapting to the hazard situation (Hagenlocher et al., 2018).

Using vulnerability functions, thresholds, innovative ways of aggregation in indicator-based assessment,

improved data sources

The use of vulnerability functions has been shown to be helpful in assessing the damage response of buildings to tsunamis (Tarbotton
et al., 2015), to coastal surge and wave hazards (Hatzikyriakou and Lin, 2017) and accounting for non-linear relationships between
mortality and temperature above a ‘comfort temperature’ (El-Zein and Tonmoy, 2017). Acknowledging the non-compensatory nature
of different vulnerability indicators (e.g., proximity to the sea cannot always be fully compensated by being wealthy), the concepts
of preference, indifference and dominance thresholds have been applied as a form of data aggregation (Tonmoy and El-Zein, 2018).
Similar to advances in exposure assessments, freely available data and mobile technologies hold promise for enabling better input
data for vulnerability assessments. Examples include using a combination of mobile phone and satellite data to determine and
monitor vulnerability indicators such as poverty (Steele et al., 2017), and using data on subnational dependency ratios and high
resolution gridded age/sex group datasets (Pezzulo et al., 2017).

 

local adaptation to SLR and its consequences (high confidence). This
section explores new knowledge since AR5 regarding changes in
ecosystem’s exposure and vulnerability as well as processes affecting
the ability of ecosystems to adapt to SLR, and associated impacts,
such as flooding or salinisation, on coastal social-ecological systems
and coast-dependent livelihoods.

Changes in the exposure of coastal ecosystems

The effects of coastal habitat loss on ecosystem exposure are well
documented (Lavery et al., 2013; Serrano et al., 2014; Short et al.,
2014; Yaakub et al., 2014; Cullen-Unsworth and Unsworth, 2016;
Breininger et al., 2017), and depend on the type of ecosystem,
its conservation status, and interactions with SLR and human
interventions such as coastal squeeze, which prevents inland

migration (Kirwan and Megonigal, 2013; Schile et al, 2014; Hopper
and Meixler, 2016). For instance, coastal habitat loss due to human
growth and encroachment due to development, and human
structures that restrict tides and, thus, interrupt mass flow processes
(water, nutrients and sediments) impact tidal ecosystems depending
on the type of restriction, its severity and the geomorphology of
the system (Burdick and Roman, 2012). Coastal dunes, for example,
although threatened, are well maintained by protected areas in some
localities, like Italy, but climate change could cause a drastic drop in
their protection (Prisco et al, 2013). In addition, seagrass and other
benthic ecosystems, for example, are declining across their range
at unprecedented rates (Telesca et al., 2015; Unsworth et al., 2015;
Samper-Villarreal et al, 2016; Balestri et al., 2017), due to degrading
water quality (ie. increased nutrient and sediment or dissolved

369
 

Chapter 4

organic carbon loads) from upland-based activities, which include
deforestation, agriculture, aquaculture, fishing, and urbanisation,
port development, channel deepening, dredging and anchoring of
boats (Saunders et al., 2013; Ray et al., 2014; Deudero et al, 2015;
Abrams et al., 2016; Benham et al., 2016; Mayer-Pinto et al., 2016;
Thorhaug et al., 2017). The exact magnitude of area loss is still
uncertain, especially at smaller scales (Yaakub et al., 2014; Telesca
et al., 2015) and the implications of habitat shifts for ecosystem
attributes and processes, and the services they deliver, remain poorly
understood (Ray et al, 2014; Tuya et al., 2014).

Changes in the vulnerability of coastal ecosystems

Global and local-scale processes influence the stability of coastal
ecosystems and can interact to restrict ecosystem responses to SLR,
and thus increase their vulnerability. At the global scale, changes in
precipitation and air temperature represent a potentially significant
tisk that increases the vulnerability of ecosystems to SLR and
related hazards (Garner et al., 2015; Osland et al., 2017). Maximum
temperature and mean precipitation change over the last 100 years
are main drivers of global ecosystem instability (Mantyka-Pringle
et al., 2013), with marked regional and local variations. In addition,
seawater warming may affect marine communities and ecosystems
but research remains sparse and results are contradictory (Crespo
et al., 2017; Hernan et al, 2017). The synergistic effects between
climate change and habitat loss due to human impact and urban
development are increasingly well-documented but the effects are
still not well-known at larger spatial and temporal scales (Kaniewski
et al, 2014; Sherwood and Greening, 2014). Although evidence
is limited, recurrent disturbances may lead to losses in ecosystem
adaptive capacity (Villnds et al., 2013).

Atsmaller scales, conversion of coastal areas to urban, agricultural and
industrial uses exacerbates pressure on ecosystems, increases their
vulnerability to natural hazards, including SLR, and decreases their
ability to support coastal livelihoods and deliver ecosystem services,
such as coastal protection, fisheries, wildlife habitat, recreational use
and tourism (high confidence; Foster et al., 2017). The vulnerability of
exposed ecosystems is highly variable, as shown in intertidal rocky
reef habitats in Australia (high confidence; Thorner et al., 2014). Even
without SLR, the transition zone between two coastal ecosystems and
adjacent uplands responds dynamically and rapidly to interannual
changes in inundation, with local factors, such as management of
water control structures, outweighing regional ones (Wasson et al.,
2013). The resulting interaction of these variables and dynamics with
fragmentation, land use planning and management (Richards and
Friess, 2017) has only recently been investigated.

Research to date has focused on identifying synergisms among
stressors (Campbell and Fourqurean, 2014; Lefcheck et al., 2017;
Moftakhari et al., 2017; Noto and Shurin, 2017), but antagonisms
and other feedbacks may be just as common (Brown et al., 2013;
Conlisk et al, 2013; Maxwell et al, 2015; Crotty et al., 2017), and
are seldom investigated, as is also true for thresholds and tipping
points in coastal ecosystem stability and vulnerability (Connell et al.,
2017; O'Meara et al., 2017; Wu et al, 2017). This precludes complete
understanding of their complex responses, which may be greater
than additive responses alone (Crotty et al., 2017), their adequate

370

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

management, or restoration regimes (Maxwell et al., 2015; Unsworth
et al, 2015). Furthermore, although local management efforts
cannot prevent severe climate change impacts on ecosystems, they
can attempt to slow down adverse impacts, and allow the degree of
evolutionary adaptation that is feasible given the trajectory of global
GHG emission reductions (Brown et al., 2013).

In contrast, ecosystems with strong physical influences controlling
elevation (sediment accretion and subsidence), even where mangrove
replacement of salt marsh is expected, do not show changes in their
vulnerability to SLR (McKee and Vervaeke, 2018), suggesting strong
resilience of some coastal ecosystems. In areas such as South Florida,
the wider Caribbean and the India-Pacific mangrove region (Lovelock
et al, 2015), however, mangroves cannot outpace current SLR rates,
and are at risk of disappearing. These regional and local effects are
highly variable (even contradictory between studies; e.g., Smoak
et al, 2013; Koch et al., 2015) and are related to local conditions
shaping vulnerability such as topography and controls over salinity
from freshwater and inputs (Flower et al., 2017), but further research
on the mass and surface energy balance is needed (Barr et al., 2013).
In addition, the responses and behaviour of private landowners, who
could impede landward migration of ecosystems, is incipient, but
needs to be taken into account in assessing the ability of coastal
ecosystems to respond to climate change (Field et al, 2017). Overall,
the long-term resilience of some coastal vegetation communities,
and their ability to respond to rapid changes in sea level, is not well
developed (Foster et al., 2017).

In summary, coastal ecosystems’ with responses to SLR around the
globe are complex and variable, with many specific responses at the
ecosystem level or from keystone (foundation) species remaining
poorly understood (Thompson et al., 2015). Moreover, responses are
studied independently when holistic approaches may be required
to understand how multiple threats affect ecosystem components,
structure and functions (Giakoumi et al., 2015), and how human
behaviour enables or constrains ecosystem responses to climate
change (Field et al., 2017). In addition to the intrinsic coastal
ecosystem values at stake, increasing exposure and vulnerability
of these ecosystems contributes to increasing human exposure and
vulnerability to SLR (medium evidence, high agreement; Arkema
et al., 2013).

4.3.2.1.2 Point of departure on the human dimensions

The 2012 Special Report on Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and
Disasters (SREX) acknowledged that patterns of human development
create and compound exposure and vulnerability to climate-related
hazards, including SLR (high confidence). The recent IPBES report also
discusses the role of anthropogenic drivers in biodiversity loss (Diaz
et al., 2019). Climate change-focussed studies have progressively
moved from the analysis of various parameters’ influence taken
individually (education, poverty, etc.) toa more systemic approach that
describes combinations of parameters, e.g., coastal urbanisation and
settlement patterns (see Section 4.3.2.2) resulting from urban-rural
discrepancies and trends in sociopolitical and economic inequalities.
The AR5 also started differentiating between contemporary and
historically-rooted drivers (e.g., trends in social systems over recent
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

decades; Marino, 2012; Duvat et al, 2017; Fawcett et al., 2017),
and reported some progress in the development of context-specific
studies, especially on coastal megacities, major deltas and small
islands (Cross-Chapter Box 9, Box 4.1).

ARS5 also concluded with very high confidence that both RSL rise
and related impacts are influenced by a variety of local social and/
or environmental processes unrelated to climate (e.g., anthropogenic
subsidence, glacial isostatic adjustment, sediment supply and
coastal squeeze). Some of these processes are partly attributable as
anthropogenic drivers, and although they may or may not be directly
related to RSL rise, they do cause changes in coastal ecosystem
habitat connectivity and ecosystem health conditions, for instance,
and consequently influence the ability of coastal social-ecological
systems as a whole to cope with and adapt to SLR and its impacts.

However, the scientific literature still barely deals with the
exposure and vulnerability of social-ecological systems to SLR
specifically. Papers predominantly analyse the immediate and
delayed consequences of extreme events such as TCs, storms and
distant swells (see Section 6.3.3), for instance, and the resulting
exposure and vulnerability ‘in the context of SLR’ (Woodruff et al.,
2013). One reason for this touches on the difficulty for society to
fully comprehend and for science to fully analyse long-term gradual
changes like SLR (Fincher et al., 2014; Oppenheimer and Alley, 2016;
Elrick-Barr et al., 2017). Consequently, Sections 4.3.2.2 to 4.3.2.5
concentrate on highlighting the anthropogenic or systemic drivers
that have the potential to influence exposure and vulnerability to
slow-onset sea level related hazards.

4.3.2.2 Settlement Trends

Major changes in coastal settlement patterns have occurred in the
course of the 20th century, and are continuing to take place due to
various complex interacting processes (Moser et al., 2012; Bennett
et al., 2016) that together configure and concentrate exposure and
vulnerability to climate change and SLR along the coast (Newton
et al., 2012; Bennett et al., 2016). These processes include population
growth and demographic changes (Smith, 2011; Neumann et al.,
2015), urbanisation and a rural exodus, tourism development, and
displacement or (re)settlement of some indigenous communities
(Ford et al., 2015). This has resulted in a growing number of people
living in the Low Elevation Coastal Zone (LECZ, coastal areas below
10 m of elevation; around 11% of the world’s population in 2010;
Neumann et al., 2015; Jones and O'Neill, 2016; Merkens et al., 2016)
and in significant infrastructure and assets being located in risk-prone
areas (high confidence). High density coastal urban development
is commonplace in both developed and developing countries, as
documented in recent case studies, for example in Canada (Fawcett
et al., 2017), China (Yin et al., 2015; Lilai et al., 2016; Yan et al., 2016),
Fiji (Hay, 2017), France (Genovese and Przyluski, 2013; Chadenas
et al., 2014; Magnan and Duvat, 2018), Israel (Felsenstein and Lichter,
2014), Kiribati (Storey and Hunter, 2010; Duvat et al., 2013), New
Zealand (Hart, 2011) and the USA (Heberger, 2012; Grifman et al.,
2013; Liu et al., 2016b). This has implications for levels of SLR risk
at regional and local scales (medium evidence, high agreement). |n

Chapter 4

Latin America and the Caribbean, for example, it is estimated that
6-8% of the population live in areas that are at high or very high
tisk of being affected by coastal hazards (Reguero et al., 2015;
Calil et al., 2017; Villamizar et al., 2017), with higher percentages
in Caribbean islands (Mycoo, 2018). In the Pacific, ~57% of Pacific
Island countries’ built infrastructure are located in risk-prone coastal
areas (Kumar and Taylor, 2015). In Kiribati, due to the flow of outer,
tural populations to limited, low-elevated capital islands, together
with constraints inherent in the sociocultural land tenure system, the
built area located <20 m from the shoreline quadrupled between
1969 and 2007-2008 (Duvat et al., 2013). Other examples of rural
exodus are reported in the recent literature, for example in the
Maldives (Speelman et al., 2017).

Population densification also affects rural areas’ exposure and
vulnerability, and interacts with other factors shaping settlement
patterns, such as the fact that ‘indigenous peoples in multiple
geographical contexts have been pushed into marginalised
territories that are more sensitive to climate impacts, in turn limiting
their access to food, cultural resources, traditional livelihoods and
place-based knowledge (...) [and therefore undermining] aspects of
social-cultural resilience’ (Ford et al., 2016b, p. 350). In the Pacific,
for example, ‘while traditional settlements on high islands (...) were
often located inland, the move to coastal locations was encouraged
by colonial and religious authorities and more recently through the
development of tourism’ (Ballu et al., 2011; Nurse et al., 2014, p.
1623; Duvat et al., 2017). Although these population movements
are orders of magnitude smaller than the global trends described
above, they play a critical role at the very local scale in explaining
the emergence of, or changes in exposure and vulnerability. In atoll
contexts, for example, the growing pressure on freshwater resources
together with a loss in local knowledge (e.g., how to collect water
from palm trees), result in increased exposure of communities to
brackish, polluted groundwater, inducing water insecurity and health
problems (Storey and Hunter, 2010; Lazrus, 2015).

4.3.2.3 Terrestrial Processes Shaping Coastal Exposure
and Vulnerability

Coastal areas, including deltas, are highly dynamic as they are
affected by natural and/or human-induced processes locally or
originating from both the land and the sea. Changes within the
catchment can therefore have severe consequences for coastal
areas in terms of sediment supply, pollution, and/or land subsidence.
Sediment supply reaching the coast is a critical factor for delta
sustainability (Tessler et al., 2018) and has declined drastically in the
last few decades due to dam construction, land use changes and
sand mining (Ouillon, 2018; high confidence). For instance, Anthony
et al. (2015) reported large-scale erosion affecting over 50% of the
delta shoreline in the Mekong delta between 2003 and 2012, which
was attributed in part to a reduction in surface-suspended sediments
in the Mekong river potentially linked to dam construction within the
river basin, sand mining in the river channels, and land subsidence
linked to groundwater over-abstraction locally. Schmitt et al. (2017)
demonstrated that these and other drivers in sediment budget
changes can have severe effects on the very physical existence of

371

 
 

Chapter 4

the Mekong delta by the end of this century, with the most important
single driver leading to inundation of large portions of the delta
being ground-water pumping induced land subsidence. Thi Ha et al.
(2018) estimated the decline in sediment supply to the Mekong delta
to be around 75% between the 1970s and the period 2009-2016.
In the Red River, the construction of the Hoa Binh Dam in the 1980s
led to a 65% drop in sediment supply to the sea (Vinh et al, 2014).
Based on projections of historical and 21st century sediment delivery
to the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna, Mahanadi and Volta deltas,
Dunn et al. (2018) showed that these deltas fall short in sediment
and may not be able to maintain their current elevation relative to
sea level, suggesting increasing salinisation, erosion, flood hazards
and adaptation demands.

Another rarely considered factor is the shift in TC climatology which
also plays a critical role in explaining changes in fluvial suspended
sediment loads to deltas as demonstrated by Darby et al. (2016), again
for the Mekong delta. More generally, most conventional engineering
strategies that are commonly employed to reduce flood risk (including
levees, sea walls, and dams) disrupt a delta’s natural mechanisms for
building land. These approaches are rather short-term solutions which
overall reduce the long-term resilience of deltas (Tessler et al., 2015;
Welch et al, 2017). Systems particularly prone to flood risk due to
anthropogenic activities include North America’s Mississippi River
delta, Europe’s Rhine River delta, and deltas in East Asia (Renaud et al.,
2013; Day et al., 2016). In regions where suspended sediments are
still available in relatively large quantities, rates of sedimentation can
vary depending on multiple factors, including the type of infrastructure
present locally, as was shown by Rogers and Overeem (2017) for the
Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna (Bengal) delta in Bangladesh as well
as seasonal differences in sediment supply and place of deposition.
For example, in meso-tidal and macro-tidal estuaries, during floods
most of the sediments are depositing in the coastal zones and a large
part of these sediments are brought back to the estuary during the
low flow season by tidal pumping. This can lead to significantly higher
deposition rates in the dry season as shown by Lefebvre et al. (2012)
in the lower Red River estuary and by Gugliotta et al. (2018) in the
Mekong delta. Enhanced sedimentation further upstream in estuaries
and a silting-up of estuarine navigation channels can have high
economic consequences for cities with a large estuarine harbour. In
Haiphong city, in North Vietnam, the authorities decided to build a
new harbour further downstream, for a cost estimated at 2 billion USD
(Duy Vinh et al., 2018).

Overall, reduced freshwater and sediment inputs from the river
basins are critical factors determining delta sustainability (Renaud
et al., 2013; Day et al., 2016). In some contexts, this can be addressed
through basin-scale management which allow more natural flows
of water and sediments through the system, including methods
for long-term flood mitigation such as improved river-floodplain
connectivity, the controlled redirection of a river (i.e, avulsions)
during times of elevated sediment loads, the removal of levees, and
the redirection of future development to lands less prone to extreme
flooding (Renaud et al, 2013; Day et al., 2016; Brakenridge et al,
2017). These actions could potentially increase the persistence of
coastal landforms in the context of SLR. Next to decreasing sediment
inputs to the coast, river bed and beach sand mining has been shown

372

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

to contribute to shoreline erosion, for example, for shorelines of Crete
(Foteinis and Synolakis, 2015), and several sub-Saharan countries
such Kenya, Madagascar, Mozambique, South Africa and Tanzania
(UNEP, 2015). At the global scale, 24% of the world’s sandy beaches
are eroding at rates exceeding 0.5 m yr", while 28% are accreting
for the period 1984-2016. The largest and longest eroding sandy
coastal stretches are in North America (Texas; Luijendijk et al., 2018).

Shoreline erosion leads to coastal squeeze if the eroding coastline
approaches fixed and hard built or natural structures as noted in
AR5 (Pontee, 2013; Wong et al., 2014), a process to which SLR also
contributes (Doody, 2013; Pontee, 2013). The AR5 further noted that
coastal squeeze is expected to accelerate due to rising sea levels
(Wong et al., 2014). Doody (2013) characterised coastal squeeze as
coastal habitats being pushed landward through the effects of SLR
and other coastal processes on the one hand and, on the other hand,
the presence of static natural or artificial barriers effectively blocking
this migration, thereby squeezing habitats into an ever narrowing
space. Distinctions are made between coastal squeeze being limited
to (1) the consequences of SLR vs. other environmental changes on
the coastline and (2) the presence of only coastal defence structures
vs. natural sloping land or other artificial infrastructure (Pontee,
2013). Recent publications have emphasised coastal squeeze related
to SLR, although inland infrastructure blocking habitat migration
is not necessarily limited to defence structures (Torio and Chmura,
2015; McDougall, 2017). Coastal ecosystem degradation by human
activities leading to coastal erosion is also an important consideration
(McDougall, 2017). Taking into consideration the current challenges
to attribute coastal impacts to SLR (Section 4.3.3.1), it can be
hypothesised here that as long as SLR impacts remain moderate, the
dominant driving factor of coastal squeeze will be anthropogenic
land-based development (e.g., Section 4.3.2.2). With higher SLR
scenarios and in the case of no further development at the coast,
SLR may become the dominant driver before the end of this century.

Preserved coastal habitats can play important roles in reducing risks
related to some coastal hazards and initiatives are being put in place
to reduce coastal squeeze, such as managed realignment (Sections
4.1, 4.4.3.1) which includes removing inland barriers (Doody, 2013).
Coastal squeeze can lead to degradation of coastal ecosystems and
species (Martinez et al., 2014), but if inland migration is unencumbered,
observation data and modelling have shown that the net area of coastal
ecosystems could increase under various scenarios of SLR, depending
on the ecosystems considered (Torio and Chmura, 2015; Kirwan
et al., 2016; Mills et al, 2016). However, recent modelling research
has shown that rapid SLR in a context of coastal squeeze could be
detrimental to the areal extent and functionality of coastal ecosystems
(Mills et al., 2016) and, for marshes, could lead to a reduction of habitat
complexity and loss of connectivity, thus affecting both aquatic and
terrestrial organisms (Torio and Chmura, 2015). Contraction of marsh
extent is also identified by Kirwan et al. (2016) when artificial barriers
to landward migration are in place. Adaptation to SLR therefore needs
to account for both development and conservation objectives so
that trade-offs between protection and realignment that satisfy both
objectives can be identified (Mills et al., 2016).
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

In summary, catchment-scale changes have very direct impacts on
the coastline, particularly in terms of water and sediment budgets
(high confidence). The changes can be rapid and modify coastlines
over short periods of time, outpacing the effects of SLR and leading
to increased exposure and vulnerability of social-ecological systems
(high confidence). Without losing sight of this fact, management of
catchment-level processes contribute to limiting rapid increases in
exposure and vulnerability. Further to hinterland influences, coastal
squeeze increases coastal exposure as well as vulnerability by the
loss of a buffer zone between the sea and infrastructure behind
the habitat undergoing coastal squeeze. The clear implication is
that coastal ecosystems progressively lose their ability to provide
regulating services with respect to coastal hazards, including as
a defence against SLR driven inundation and salinisation (high
confidence). Vulnerability is also increased if freshwater resources
become salinised, particularly if these resources are already scarce.
The exposure and vulnerability of human communities is exacerbated
by the loss of other provisioning, supporting and cultural services
generated by coastal ecosystems, which is especially problematic for
coast-dependent communities (high confidence).

4.3.2.4 Other Human Dimensions

The development of local scale case studies from a social science
perspective, for example, in the Arctic (Ford et al., 2012; Ford
et al., 2014), small islands (Petzold, 2016; Duvat et al., 2017) and
within cities (Rosenzweig and Solecki, 2014; Paterson et al., 2017;
Texier-Teixeira and Edelblutte, 2017) or at the household level (Koerth
et al., 2014) support a better understanding of the anthropogenic
drivers of exposure and vulnerability. Four examples of drivers that
were only emerging at the time of the AR5 are discussed below. Very
importantly, another major emerging dimension that is not discussed
here but rather in Section 4.4.4, relates to power asymmetries,
politics, and the prevailing political economy, which are important
drivers of exposure and vulnerability to SLR-related coastal hazards,
and consequently adaptation prospects (Eriksen et al., 2015; DolSak
and Prakash, 2018). Recent literature provides examples in coastal
megacities like Jakarta, Indonesia (Shatkin, 2019) as well as in
smaller cities, like Maputo, Mozambique (Broto et al, 2015) and
Surat, India (Chu, 2016a; Chu, 2016b), and many other coastal cities
and settlements around the world (high confidence; Jones et al.,
2015; Allen et al., 2018; Hughes et al., 2018; Sovacool, 2018).

4.3.2.4.1 Gender inequality

Gender inequality came to prominence only recently in climate change
studies (~15 years ago; see Pearse, 2017). In light of sea-related
hazards and SLR specifically, the issue is still mainly investigated in the
context of developing countries, although growing attention is paid to
the issue in developed countries (e.g., Lee et al, 2015; Pearse, 2017).
Recent studies in southern coastal Bangladesh, for example, show
that women get less access than men to climate- and disaster-related
information (both emergency information and training programmes),
decision making processes at the household and community levels,
economic resources including financial means such as micro-credit,
land ownership, and mobility within and outside the villages (Rahman,
2013; Alam and Rahman, 2014; Garai, 2016). Gender inequity may

Chapter 4

be inherent in unfavourable background conditions (higher illiteracy
rates, deficiencies in food and calories intake and poorer health
conditions) as a result of, among other things, traditions, social norms
and patriarchy. Together, these barriers disadvantage women more
than men in developing effective responses to anticipate gradual
environmental changes such as persistent coastal erosion, flooding
and soil salinisation (medium evidence high agreement). Such
conclusions are in line with the literature on gender inequality and
climate change at large (Alston, 2013; Pearse, 2017), thus suggesting
no major SLR-inherent specificities.

4.3.2.4.2 Loss of indigenous knowledge and local knowledge

Despite the identification of this issue in AR4, its treatment in
AR5 remained limited. Recent literature partly focussing on SLR
reaffirms that indigenous knowledge and local knowledge (IK and
LK; Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 1 and Glossary) are key to
determining how people recognise and respond to environmental
tisk (Bridges and McClatchey, 2009; Lefale, 2010; Leonard et al.,
2013; Lazrus, 2015), and therefore to increasing adaptive capacity
and reducing long-term vulnerability (Ignatowski and Rosales, 2013;
McMillen et al., 2014; Hesed and Paolisso, 2015; Janif et al., 2016;
Morrison, 2017).

IK and LK contribute both as a foundation for and an outcome of
customary resource management systems aimed at regulating
resource use and securing critical ecosystem protection (examples
in Indonesia; Hiwasaki et al., 2015), structuring the relationship
between people and authorities, and framing and maintaining a
strong sense of place in the community (examples in Timor Leste;
Hiwasaki et al., 2015). In turn, this allows local communities to
predict and prepare for both sudden shock events that have historical
precedent and, when IK and LK are embedded in day-to-day rituals
and decision making processes, to also anticipate the consequences
of gradual changes, as in sea level (examples in Indonesia; Hiwasaki
et al, 2015). Customary resource management systems based on
IK and elders’ leadership — for instance, Rahui in French Polynesia
(Gharasian, 2016), or Mo in the Marshall Islands (Bridges and
McClatchey, 2009) - also allow communities to diversify access to
marine and terrestrial resources using seasonal calendars, to ensure
collective food and water security, and to maintain ecological
integrity (McMillen et al, 2014). In rural Pacific atolls, traditional
food preservation and storage (eg., storing germinated coconuts
or drying fish) still play a role in anticipating disruptions in natural
resource availability (Campbell, 2015; Lazrus, 2015). Such practices
have enabled the survival of isolated communities from the Arctic
to tropical islands in constraining sea environments for centuries
to millennia (McMillen et al., 2014; Nunn et al., 2017a). Morrison
(2017) argues that IK and LK can also play a role in supporting
internal migration in response to SLR, by avoiding social and cultural
uprooting (Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 1).

In some specific contexts, climate change will also imply no-analogue
changes, such as rapid ice-melt and changing conditions in the Arctic
that have no precedent in the modern era, and could thus limit the
relevance of IK and LK in efforts to address significantly different
circumstances. Except in these specific situations, the literature

373

 
 

Chapter 4

suggests that the loss of IK and LK, and related social norms and
mechanisms, will increase populations’ exposure and vulnerability to
SLR impacts (Nakashima et al., 2012). The literature notably points
out that modern, externally-driven socioeconomic dynamics, such as
the introduction of imported food (noodles, rice, canned meat and
fish, etc.), diminish the cultural importance of IK-based practices and
diets locally, together with introducing dependency on monetisation
and external markets (Hay, 2013; Campbell, 2015).

Asa result, the loss of I and LK may increase long-term vulnerability
to SLR (medium evidence, high agreement). Given that IK and LK are
largely based on observing and ‘making sense’ of the surrounding
environment (moon, waves, winds, animal behaviours, topography,
etc.), such a loss reflects a more general concern about the weakening
of environmental connectedness in contemporary societies, which is
not limited to remote, rural and developing communities (medium
confidence). In developed contexts too, the loss of LK has played a
critical role in recent coastal disasters (e.g., Katrina in 2005 in the
USA, Kates et al, 2006) and increasing vulnerability to SLR (e.g.,
Newton and Weichselgartner, 2014; Wong et al., 2014).

4.3.2.4.3 Social capital

Coastal communities draw on social structures and capabilities
that can reduce risk and increase adaptive capacity in the face of
coastal hazards (Aldrich, 2017; Petzold, 2018). Although the term is
subject to debate (Meyer, 2018), social capital — that is, the level
of cohesion between individuals, between groups of individuals, and
between people and institutions, within and between communities —
is considered to be a key enabler for collective action to reduce risk
and build adaptive capacity (Adger, 2010; Aldrich and Meyer, 2015;
Petzold and Ratter, 2015). Levels of social capital can be influenced
by underlying social processes, such as socioeconomic (in)equalities,
gender issues, health, social networks and social media. It applies
to both developing and developed countries, for example in densely
populated deltas (Jordan, 2015), European coasts (Jones and Clark,
2014; Petzold, 2016), Asian urban or semi-urban coastal areas (Lo
et al., 2015; Triyanti et al., 2017) and Pacific islands (Neef et al., 2018).
Social capital framed as an enabler for reducing vulnerability has been
studied in the context of extreme events (risk prevention mechanisms,
emergency responses and post-crisis actions) and collective
environmental management (eg., replanting mangroves, beach
cleaning, etc.). Social capital also enables adaptation prospects. For
example, its role has been explored in public acceptability of long-term
coastal adaptation policies in the UK (Jones and Clark, 2014; Jones
et al., 2015). The role of social capital in building resilience to climate
stress in coastal Bangladesh was explored by Jordan (2015), who
found complex and even contradictory interactions between social
capital and resilience to climate stress. Among others, Jordan (2015)
also advises caution about uncritical importation of such Westernised
concepts in seeking to understand and address coastal vulnerability
in developing countries.

4.3.2.4.4 Risk perception

Risk perception, which is context-specific and varies from one
individual to another, may influence communities’ exposure and

374

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

vulnerability as it shapes authorities’ and people's attitudes towards
sudden and slow onset hazards, as shown by Terpstra (2011),
Lazrus (2015), Elrick-Barr et al. (2017) and O'Neill et al. (2016) in
the Netherlands, Tuvalu, Australia and Ireland, respectively. The
progressive discounting of coastal hazard risks and subsequent
loss of risk memory also played a role in coastal disasters such as
Hurricane Katrina in 2005 in the USA (Burby, 2006; Kates et al., 2006)
and Storm Xynthia in 2010 in France (Vinet et al., 2012; Genovese
and Przyluski, 2013; Chadenas et al., 2014).

Risk perceptions stem from intertwined predictors such as ‘gender,
political party identification, cause-knowledge, impact-knowledge,
response-knowledge, holistic affect, personal experience with
extreme weather events, [social norms] and biospheric value
orientations’ (Kellens et al., 2011; Carlton and Jacobson, 2013; Lujala
et al., 2015; van der Linden, 2015, p. 112; Weber, 2016; Elrick-Barr
et al, 2017; Goeldner-Gianella et al., 2019). In general, there is a
lack of education, training and thus knowledge and literacy on recent
and projected trends in sea level, which compromises ownership
of science facts and projections at all levels, from individuals and
institutions to society at large.

While some studies have begun to highlight the influence of the
distance from the sea on risk perceptions (Milfont et al., 2014; Lujala
et al, 2015; O'Neill et al, 2016), there is still little knowledge about
how risk perceptions vary across different geographical and social
contexts, and how this influences exposure and vulnerability to
coastal hazards (e.g., Terpstra, 2011; van der Linden, 2015). There
is a critical lack of studies specifically addressing SLR. Some recent
works conducted in coastal Australia suggest that while people are
confident about their ability to cope with an already experienced
event, when it comes to SLR, the dominant narrative is articulated
around the barriers related to the ‘uncertainty in the nature and
scale of the impacts as well as the response options available’
(Elrick-Barr et al., 2017, p. 1147). Similar conclusions have been
highlighted in the Caribbean islands of St. Vincent (Smith, 2018) and
the Bahamas (Thomas and Benjamin, 2018). SLR is rarely addressed
separately from sea-related extreme events, which masks a crucial
difference between already-observed and delayed impacts. Climate
change is considered a “distant psychological risk” (Spence et al.,
2012), making it and SLR per se ‘markedly different from the way
that our ancestors have traditionally perceived threats in their local
environment’ (Milfont et al., 2014; Lujala et al., 2015; van der Linden,
2015, p. 112; O'Neill et al., 2016).

4.3.2.5 Towards a Synthetic Understanding

of the Drivers of Exposure and Vulnerability

Recent literature confirms that anthropogenic drivers played an
important role, over the last century, in increasing exposure and
vulnerability worldwide, and indicates that they will continue
to do so in the absence of adaptation (medium evidence, high
agreement). Some scholars argue that ‘even with pervasive and
extensive environmental change associated with ~2°C warming, it
is non-climatic factors that primarily determine impacts, response
options and barriers to adapting’ (Ford et al., 2015, p. 1046). Although
it is the interaction of climate and non-climate factors that eventually
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

determine the level of impacts, acknowledging the role of a range of
purely anthropogenic drivers has important implications for action. It
suggests that major action can be taken now to enhance long-term
adaptation prospects, notwithstanding uncertainty about local RSL
rise and resultant impacts in the distant future (medium evidence,
high agreement; Magnan et al., 2016). Acting on the human-driven
drivers and root causes of vulnerability could yield co-benefits, for
example by improving the state and condition of coastal ecosystems —
and hence the capacity to cope with or adapt to SLR impacts — or, in
deltaic regions, lowering the rates of anthropogenic subsidence and,
in turn, minimising changes in sea level.

In addition, coastal ecosystem degradation is acknowledged as
another major non-climatic driver of exposure and vulnerability
(high confidence). The ability of coastal ecosystems to serve as a
buffer zone between the sea and human assets (settlements and
infrastructure), and to provide regulating services with respect to
SLR-related coastal hazards (including inundation and salinisation),
is progressively being lost due to coastal squeeze, pollution, and
habitat and land degradation mainly due to land-use conversion.

We now better understand the diversity and interactions of the
climate and non-climate drivers of exposure and vulnerability, as well
as their dynamics over time (Bennett et al., 2016; Duvat et al., 2017).
As a result, it is now realised how many context-specificities interact
(including geography, economic development, social inequity, power

Climate change —————————_ Other climate-related drivers

(e.g., ocean warming, acidification and deoxygenation)

Global and regional mean sea level rise

Sea level hazards

+ Local mean sea level rise

Non-climate anthropogenic drivers

+ Settlement patterns, loss of indigenous
knowledge and local knowledge, low risk
perception, etc.

+ Human-induced ecosystem degradation
due to changes in catchment connectivity,
mass flows (water, sediment, nutrients) as
well as coastal squeeze

+ Submergence of land

+ Enhanced flooding

+ Erosion of land and beaches

+ Salinisation of soils,

+ Impeded drainage

Coastal hazards

groundwater and surface waters

+ Loss of and change in marine
and coastal ecosystems

Chapter 4

and politics, and risk perceptions) and play a critical role in shaping
the direction and influence of individual drivers and of their possible
combinations on the ground (medium evidence, high agreement;
Eriksen et al., 2015; Hesed and Paolisso, 2015; McCubbin et al.,
2015). This also provides a stronger foundation to identify the range
of possible responses (Sections 1.6.1, 1.6.2 and 4.4.3) to observed
impacts and projected risks, as well as critical areas of action to
enhance adaptation pathways (Section 4.4.4).

Recent studies (eg., cited in Sections 4.3.2.1.1, 4.3.2.2, 4.3.2.4.2
and 4.3.2.4.4) also confirm AR5 conclusions that both developing
and developed countries are exposed and vulnerable to SLR
(high confidence).

4.3.3 Observed Impacts, and Current

and Future Risk of Sea Level Rise

SLR leads to hazards and impacts that are also partly inherent in
other processes such as starvation of sediments provided by rivers
(Kondolf et al., 2014); permafrost thaw and ice retreat; or the
disruption of natural dynamics by land reclamation or sediment
mining. Six main concerns for low-lying coasts (Figure 4.13) are: (i)
permanent submergence of land by mean sea levels or mean high
tides; (ii) more frequent or intense flooding; (iii) enhanced erosion;
(iv) loss and change of ecosystems; (v) salinisation of soils, ground

4

Loss of: Direct impacts Damage to:

the built
environment

human
activities

land and

coastal & marine
land uses

people
ecosystem services

J

Figure 4.13 | Overview of the main cascading effects of sea level rise (SLR). Colours of lines (light green and light orange) and boxes are used only for the readability of
the figure. Sea level hazards are discussed in Section 4.2. The various impacts listed in this figure are discussed in the sections below: Submergence of land and enhanced
flooding (4.3.3.2); Erosion of land and beaches (4.3.3.3); Salinisation (4.3.3.4); Loss of and changes in ecosystems (4.3.3.5); Loss of land and land uses (4.3.3.2); Loss of
ecosystems services (4.3.3.5); Damage to people and to the built environment (4.3.3.2, 4.3.3.3, 4.3.3.4 and 4.3.3.6); Damage to human activities (4.3.3.6). Non-climate
anthropogenic drivers are discussed in Section 4.3.2 and other climate-related drivers are notably discussed in Section 5.2.1 and 5.2.2.

375

 
 

Chapter 4

and surface water; and (vi) impeded drainage. This section discusses
some of these hazards (flooding, erosion, salinisation) as well as
observed and projected impacts on some critical marine ecosystems
(marshes, mangroves, lagoons, coral reefs and seagrasses),
ecosystem services (coastal protection) and human societies (people,
assets, infrastructures, economic and subsistence activities, inequity
and well-being, etc.). In many cases, the Chapter 4 assessment of
impacts and responses uses results from literature based on values
of SLR and ESL events prior to SROCC. However, the general findings
reported here also carry forward with the new SROCC SLR and ESL
values. Except in the case of submergence and flooding of coastal
areas (Section 4.3.3.2), this section assumes no major additional
adaptation efforts compared to today (ie., neither significant
intensification of ongoing action nor new types of action), thus
reflecting the state of knowledge in the literature.

4.3.3.1 Attribution of Observed Physical Changes
to Sea Level Rise

The AR5 concludes that attribution of coastal changes to SLR is
difficult because ‘the coastal sea level change signal is often small
when compared to other processes’ (Wong et al., 2014: 375). New
literature, however, shows that extreme water levels at the coast
are rising due to mean SLR (4.2.2.4 for observations, and 4.3.5 for
projections), with observable impacts on chronic flooding in some
regions (Sweet and Park, 2014; Strauss et al., 2016).

On coastal morphological changes for example, contemporary SLR
currently acts as a ‘background driver’, with extreme events, changes
in wave patterns, tides and human intervention often described as
the prevailing drivers of observed changes (Grady et al., 2013; Albert
et al, 2016). Morphological changes are also interacting with other
impacts of SLR, such as coastal flooding (Pollard et al., 2018). Despite
the complexity of the attribution issue (Romine et al., 2013; Le
Cozannet et al., 2014), recent literature suggests possibly emerging
signs of the direct influence of recent SLR on shoreline behaviour,
for example on small highly-sensitive reef islands in New Caledonia
(Garcin et al., 2016) and in the Solomon Islands (Albert et al., 2016).
Early signs of the direct influence of SLR on estuaries’ water salinity
are also emerging, for example, in the Delaware, USA, where Ross
et al. (2015) estimate a rate of salinity increase by as much as 4.4 psu
(Practical Salinity Unit) per metre of SLR since the 1950s.

Overall, while the literature suggests that it is still too early to attribute
coastal impacts to SLR in most of the world’s coastal areas, there
is very high confidence that as sea level continues to rise (Sections
4.2.3.2, 4.2.3.3), the frequency, severity and duration of hazards and
related impacts increases (Woodruff et al., 2013; Lilai et al., 2016;
Vitousek et al., 2017; Sections 4.2.3.4, 6.3.1.3). Detectable impacts
and attributable impacts on shoreline behaviour are expected as
soon as the second half of the 21st century (Nicholls and Cazenave,
2010; Storlazzi et al, 2018).

376

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

4.3.3.2 Submergence and Flooding of Coastal Areas

Since AR5, a number of continental and global scale coastal exposure
studies have accounted for sub-national human dynamics such as
coastward migration or coastal urbanisation. These studies project
a population increase in the LECZ (coastal areas below 10 m of
elevation) by 2100 of 85 to 239 million people as compared to only
considering national dynamics (Merkens et al., 2016; Section 4.3.2).
Under the five SSPs and without SLR, the population living in the
LECZ increases from 640-700 million in 2000 to over one billion in
2050 under all SSPs, and then declines to 500-900 million in 2100
under all SSPs, except for SSP3 (i.e., a world in which countries will
increasingly focus on domestic issues, or at best regional ones), for
which the coastal population reaches 1.1-1.2 billion ones and
O'Neill, 2016; Merkens et al., 2016).

The population exposed to mean and ESL events will grow
significantly during the 21st century (high confidence) with
socioeconomic development and SLR contributing roughly equally
(medium confidence). Considering an average relative SLR of
0.7-0.9 m but no population growth, the number of people living
below the hundred-year ESL in Latin America and the Caribbean
will increase from 7.5 million in 2011 to 9 million by the end of the
century (Reguero et al, 2015). Considering population growth and
urbanisation, only 21 cm of global mean SLR by 2060 would increase
the global population living below the hundred-year ESL from about
189 million in 2000 to 316-411 million in 2060, with the largest
absolute changes in South and Southeast Asia and the largest relative
changes in Africa (Neumann et al., 2015). Considering population
growth, Hauer et al. (2016) estimate that 4.3 and 13.1 million people
in the USA would live below the levels of 0.9 and 1.8 m SLR by 2100.

New coastal flood risk studies conducted since AR4 at global,
continental and city scale, reinforce ARS findings that if coastal
societies do not adapt, flood risks will increase by 2-3 orders of
magnitude reaching catastrophic levels by the end of the century,
even under the lower end SLR expected under RCP2.6 (high
confidence; Hinkel et al., 2014; Abadie et al., 2016; Diaz, 2016;
Hunter et al., 2017; Lincke and Hinkel, 2018; Abadie, 2018; Brown
et al., 2018a; Nicholls, 2018). In combination, these studies take
into account a SLR scenario range wider than the /ikely range of
ARS5 but consistent with the range of projections assessed in this
report (Section 4.2.3.2). For example, considering 25-123 cm of SLR
in 2100, all SSPs and no adaptation, Hinkel et al. (2014) find that
0.2-4.6% of global population is expected to be flooded annually in
2100, with expected annual damages (EAD) amounting to 0.3-9.3%
of global GDP. Assessing 120 cities globally, Abadie (2018) find that
under a weighted combination of the probabilistic scenarios, New
Orleans and Guangzhou Guangdong rank highest with EAD above
1 trillion USD (not discounted) in each city. For Europe, EAD are
expected to rise from 1.25 billion EUR today to 93-960 billion EUR
by the end of the century (Vousdoukas et al., 2018b). Already today,
many small islands face large flood damages relative to their GDP
specifically through TCs (Cashman and Nagdee, 2017) and under SLR
EAD can reach up to several percent of GDP in 2100, as highlighted in
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

ARS5 (Wong et al., 2014). Similar to the exposure studies, estimates of
future flood risk without considering adaptation, as presented in this
paragraph, do not provide a meaningful characterisation of coastal
flood risks, because adaptation and specifically hard protection
is expected to be widespread during the 21st century in urban
areas and cities (high confidence; Section 4.4.3.2.2). Rather, these
estimates need to be seen as illustrations of the scale of adaptation
needed to offset risk.

Flood risk studies that have included adaptation find that hard coastal
protection is generally very effective in reducing flood risks during
the 21st century even under high SLR scenarios (high confidence;
Hinkel et al., 2014; Diaz, 2016; Brown et al., 2018a; Hinkel et al., 2018;
Lincke and Hinkel, 2018; Tamura et al., 2019) (Section 4.4.2.2.2).
For example, Hinkel et al. (2014) find that under 25-123 cm of SLR
in 2100 and all SSPs, hard coastal protection reduces the annual
number of people affected by coastal floods and EAD by 2-3 orders
of magnitude. Under high-end SLR and beyond the 21st century,
effectiveness of coastal adaptation is expected to decline rapidly, but
there is a lack of studies addressing this issue. Furthermore, there is a
lack of studies taking into account responses beyond hard protection
such as ecosystem-based adaptation, accommodation, advance and
retreat (Sections 4.4.2).

Studies also confirm AR5 findings that the relative costs and benefits
of coastal adaptation are distributed unequally across countries and
regions (high confidence; Wong et al., 2014; Diaz, 2016; Lincke and
Hinkel, 2018; Tamura et al., 2019). For example, while the median cost
of protection and retreat under RCP8.5 in 2050 has been estimated
to be under 0.09% of national GDP, large relative costs are found for
small island states such as the Marshall Islands (7.6%), the Maldives
(7.5%), Tuvalu (4.6%) and Kiribati (4.1%; Diaz, 2016). Furthermore,
on a global average and for urban and densely populated regions,
hard protection is highly cost efficient with benefit-cost ratios up
to 10‘, but for poorer and less densely populated areas benefit-cost
ratios are generally smaller than one (Lincke and Hinkel, 2018). Hence,
without substantial transfer payments supporting poor areas, coastal
flood risks will evolve unequally during this century, with richer and
densely populated areas well protected behind hard structures and
poorer less densely populated areas suffering losses and damages,
and eventually retreating from the coast.

While continental to global scale flood exposure and risk studies
have also explored a wider range of uncertainty as compared to
AR5, much remains to be done. All of these studies rely on global
elevation data, but few studies have explored the underlying bias.
For example, for the Po delta in Italy, it was found that elevation
data based on the widely used Shuttle Radar Topography Mission
(SRTM), Reuter et al. (2007) overestimates the 100-year floodplain by
about 50% as compared to local Lidar data (Wolff et al., 2016), while
in the Ria Formosa region in Portugal SRTM underestimates EAD by
up to 50% depending on the resampled resolution of the Lidar data
(Vousdoukas et al., 2018a). For the USA, SRTM data systemically
underestimates population exposure below 3 m by more than 60%
as compared to coastal Lidar data (Kulp and Strauss, 2016). A global
scale comparison of major contributors to flood risk uncertainty
finds that uncertainty in digital elevation data is roughly at equal

Chapter 4

footing with uncertainties in socioeconomic development, emission
scenarios, and SLR in determining the magnitude of flood risks in the
21st century (Hinkel et al, 2014). At a European level, the number of
people living in the 100-year coastal floodplain can vary between
20-70% depending on the different inundation models used and the
inclusion or exclusion of wave set up (Vousdoukas, 2016). Comparing
damage functions attained in different studies for European cities,
Prahl et al. (2018) find up to four-fold differences in damages for
floods above 3 m. Another major source of uncertainty relates to
uncertainties in present-day ESL events due to the application of
different extreme value methods (Wahl et al., 2017; Section 4.2.3.4).
While all of the uncertainties reported above affected the actual
size of exposure and flood risk figures, they do not affect the overall
conclusions drawn here.

4.3.3.3. Coastal Erosion and Projected Global Impacts
of Enhanced Erosion on Human Systems

Recent global assessments of coastal erosion indicate that land losses
currently dominate over land gains and that human interventions are
a major driver of shoreline changes (Cazenave and Cozannet, 2014;
Luijendijk et al., 2018; Mentaschi et al., 2018). Luijendijk et al. (2018)
estimate that over the 1984-2016 period, about a quarter of the
world’s sandy beaches eroded at rates exceeding 0.5m yr! while
about 28% accreted. While such global results can be challenged
due to the relatively large detection threshold used (+0.5 m yr),
there is growing literature indicating that coastal erosion is occurring
or increasing, e.g. in the Arctic (Barnhart et al., 2014a; Farquharson
et al., 2018; Irrgang et al., 2019), Brazil (Amaro et al, 2015), China
(Yang et al., 2017), Colombia (Rangel-Buitrago et al, 2015), India
(Kankara et al., 2018), and along a large number of deltaic systems
worldwide (e.g., Section 4.2.2.4).

Since AR5, however, there is growing appreciation and understanding
of the ability of coastal systems to respond dynamically to SLR (Passeri
et al., 2015; Lentz et al, 2016; Deng et al., 2017). Most low-lying coastal
systems exhibit important feedbacks between biological and physical
processes (e.g., Wright and Nichols, 2018), that have allowed them
to maintain a relatively stable morphology under moderate rates of
SLR (<0.3 cm yr’) over the past few millennia (Woodruff et al., 2013;
Cross-Chapter Box 5 in Chapter 1). In a global review on multi-decadal
changes in the land area of 709 atoll islands, Duvat (2019) shows that
in a context of more rapid SLR than the global mean (Becker et al.,
2012; Palanisamy et al., 2014), 73.1% of islands were stable in area,
while respectively 15.5% and 11.4% increased and decreased in size.
While anthropogenic drivers played a major role, especially in urban
islands (eg., shoreline stabilisation by coastal defences, increase in
island size as a result of reclamation works), this study and others
(eg., McLean and Kench, 2015) suggest that these islands have had
the capacity to maintain their land area by naturally adjusting to SLR
over the past decades (high confidence). However, it has been argued
that this capacity could be reduced in the coming decades, due to the
combination of higher rates of SLR, increased wave energy (Albert et al.,
2016), changes in run-up (Shope et al., 2017) and storm wave direction
(Harley et al., 2017), effects of ocean warming and acidification on
critical ecosystems such as coral reefs (Section 4.3.3.5.2), and a
continued increase in anthropogenic pressure.

377

 
 

Chapter 4

From a global scale perspective, based on AR4 SLR scenarios and
without considering the potential benefits of adaptation, Hinkel et al.
(2013b) estimate that about 6000 to 17,000 km? of land is expected
to be lost during the 21st century due to enhanced coastal erosion
associated with SLR, in combination with other drivers. This could
lead to a displacement of 1.6—-5.3 million people and associated
cumulative costs of 300 to 1000 billion USD (Section 4.4.3.5).
Importantly, these global figures mask the wide diversity of local
situations; and some literature is emerging on the non-physical and
non-quantifiable impacts of coastal erosion, for example, on the loss
of recreational grounds and the induced risks to the associated social
dimensions (i.e., how local communities experience coastal erosion
impacts; Karlsson et al., 2015).

4.3.3.4 — Salinisation

With rising sea levels, saline water intrusion into coastal aquifers
and surface waters and soils is expected to be more frequent and
enter farther landwards. Salinisation of groundwater, surface water
and soil resources also increases with land-based drought events,
decreasing river discharges in combination with water extraction and
SLR (high confidence).

4.3.3.4.1 Coastal aquifers and groundwater lenses

Groundwater volumes will primarily be affected by variations in
precipitation patterns (Taylor et al., 2013; Jiménez Cisneros et al.,
2014), which are expected to increase water stress in small islands
(Holding et al., 2016). While SLR will mostly impact groundwater
quality (Bailey et al., 2016) and in turn exacerbate salinisation
induced by marine flooding events (Gingerich et al., 2017), it will
also affect the watertable height (Rotzoll and Fletcher, 2013; Jiménez
Cisneros et al., 2014; Masterson et al., 2014; Werner et al., 2017).
In addition, the natural migration of groundwater lenses inland in
response to SLR can also be severely constrained by urbanisation,
for example, in semi-arid South Texas, USA (Uddameri et al., 2014).

These changes will affect both freshwater availability (for drinking
water supply and agriculture) and vegetation dynamics. At many
locations, however, direct anthropogenic influences, such as
groundwater pumping for agricultural or urban uses, already impact
salinisation of coastal aquifers more strongly than what is expected
from SLR in the 21st century (Ferguson and Gleeson, 2012; Jiménez
Cisneros et al., 2014; Uddameri et al., 2014), with trade-offs in terms
of groundwater depletion that may contribute to anthropogenic
subsidence and thus increase coastal flood risk. Recent studies also
suggest that the influence of land-surface inundation on seawater
intrusion and resulting salinisation of groundwater lenses on
small islands has been underestimated until now (Ataie-Ashtiani
et al., 2013; Ketabchi et al, 2014). Such impacts will potentially also
combine with a projected drying of most of the tropical-to-temperate
islands by mid-century (Karnauskas et al., 2016).

4,3.3.4.2 Surface waters

The quality of surface water resources (in estuaries, rivers, reservoirs,
etc.) can be affected by the intrusion of saline water, both in a

378

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

direct (increased salinity) and indirect way (altered environmental
conditions which change the behaviour of pollutants and microbes).
In terms of direct impacts, statistical models and long-term (1950 to
present) records of salinity show significant upward trends in salinity
and a positive correlation between rising sea levels and increasing
residual salinity, for example in the Delaware Estuary, USA (Ross
et al., 2015). Higher salinity levels, further inland, have also been
reported in the Gorai river basin, southwestern Bangladesh (Bhuiyan
and Dutta, 2012), and in the Mekong Delta, Vietnam. In the Mekong
Delta for instance, salinity intrusion extends around 15 km inland
during the rainy season and typically around 50 km during dry season
(Gugliotta et al, 2017). Importantly, salinity intrusion in these deltas
is caused by a variety of factors such as changes in discharge and
water abstraction along with relative SLR. More broadly, the impact
of salinity intrusion can be significant in river deltas or low-lying
wetlands, especially during low-flow periods such as in the dry season
(Dessu et al., 2018). In Bangladesh, for instance, some freshwater fish
species are expected to lose their habitat with increasing salinity, with
profound consequences on fish-dependent communities (Dasgupta
et al., 2017). In the Florida Coastal Everglades, sea level increasingly
exceeds ground surface elevation at the most downstream freshwater
sites, affecting marine-to-freshwater hydrologic connectivity and
transport of salinity and phosphorous upstream from the Gulf of
Mexico. The impact of SLR is higher in the dry season when there
is practically no freshwater inflow (Dessu et al, 2018). Salinity
intrusion was shown to cause shifts in the diatom assemblages,
with expected cascading effects through the food web (Mazzei and
Gaiser, 2018). Salinisation of surface water may lead to limitations
in drinking water supply (Wilbers et al., 2014), as well as to future
fresh water shortage in reservoirs, for example in Shanghai (Li et al.,
2015). Salinity changes the partitioning and mobility of some metals,
and hence their concentration or speciation in the water bodies
(Noh et al., 2013; Wong et al., 2015; de Souza Machado et al., 2018).
Varying levels of salinity also influence the abundance and toxicity of
Vibrio cholerae in the Ganges Delta (Batabyal et al., 2016).

4.3.3.43 Soils

Salinisation is one of the major drivers of soil degradation, with sea
water intrusion being one of the common causes (Daliakopoulos
et al, 2016). In a study in the Ebro Delta, Spain, for instance, soil
salinity was shown to be directly related to distances to the river, to
the delta inner border, and to the old river mouth (Genua-Olmedo
et al., 2016). Land elevation was the most important variable in
explaining soil salinity.

SLR was also shown to decrease organic carbon (Corg) concentrations
and stocks in sediments of salt marshes as reworked marine particles
contribute with a lower amount of Corg than terrigenous sediments. Corg
accumulation in tropical salt marshes can be as high as in mangroves
and the reduction of Corg stocks by ongoing SLR might cause high CO2
releases (Ruiz-Fernandez et al., 2018). In many cases attribution to SLR
is missing, but, independent from clear attribution, sea water intrusion
leads to a salinisation of exposed soils with changes in carbon
dynamics (Ruiz-Fernandez et al., 2018) and microbial communities
(Sanchez-Rodriguez et al., 2017), soil enzyme activity and metal toxicity
(Zheng et al., 2017). Water salinity levels in the pores of coastal marsh
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

soils can become significantly elevated in just one week of flooding by
sea water, which can potentially negatively impact associated microbial
communities for significantly longer time periods (McKee et al, 2016).
SLR will also alter the frequency and magnitude of wet/dry periods
and salinity levels in coastal ecosystems, with consequences for the
formation of climate relevant GHGs (Liu et al., 2017b) and therefore
feedbacks to the climate.

Soil salinisation affects agriculture directly with impacts on plant
germination (Sanchez-Garcia et al., 2017), plant biomass (rice and
cotton) production (Yao et al, 2015), and yield (Genua-Olmedo
et al., 2016). Impact on agriculture is especially relevant in low-lying
coastal areas where agricultural production is a major land use, such
as in river deltas.

4.3.3.5 Ecosystems and Ecosystem Services

4.3.3.5.1 Tidal wetlands

Global coastal wetlands have been reduced by a half since the
pre-industrial period due to the impacts of both climatic and
non-climatic drivers such as flooding, coastal urbanisation,
alterations in drainage and sediment supply. (Sections 4.3.2.3, 5.3.2).
Potentially one of the most important of the eco-morphodynamic
feedbacks allowing for relatively stable morphology under SLR is the
ability of marsh and mangrove systems to enhance the trapping of
sediment, which in turn allows tidal wetlands to grow and increase
the production and accumulation of organic material (Kirwan and
Megonigal, 2013). When ecosystem health is maintained and
sufficient sediment exists to support their growth, this particular
feedback has generally allowed marshes and mangrove systems to
build vertically at rates equal to or greater than SLR up to the present
day (Kirwan et al, 2016; Woodroffe et al., 2016).

While recent reviews suggest that mangroves’ surface accretion
rate will keep pace with a high SLR scenario (RCP8.5) up to years
2055 and 2070 in fringe and basin mangrove settings, respectively
(Sasmito et al., 2016), process-based models of vertical marsh
growth that incorporate biological and physical feedbacks support
survival under rates of SLR as high as 1-5 cm yr" before drowning
(Kirwan et al., 2016). Threshold rates of SLR before marsh drowning
however vary significantly from site-to-site and can be substantially
lower than 1 cm yr in micro-tidal regions where the tidal trapping
of sediment is reduced and/or in areas with low sediment availability
(Lovelock et al., 2015; Ganju et al., 2017; Jankowski et al., 2017;
Watson et al., 2017). Global environmental change may also to lead
to changes in growth rates, productivity and geographic distribution
of different mangrove and marsh species, including the replacement
of environmentally sensitive species by those possessing greater
climatic tolerance (Krauss et al., 2014; Reef and Lovelock, 2014;
Coldren et al., 2019). Processes impacting lateral changes at the
marsh boundary including wave erosion are just as important, if not
more, than vertical accretion rates in determining coastal wetland
survival (e.g., Mariotti and Carr, 2014). For most low-lying coastlines,
a seaward loss of wetland area due to marsh retreat could be offset
by a similar landward migration of coastal wetlands (Kirwan and
Megonigal, 2013; Schile et al., 2014), this landward migration having

Chapter 4

the potential to maintain and even increase the extent of coastal
wetlands globally (Morris et al., 2012; Kirwan et al., 2016; Schuerch
et al., 2018). This natural process will however be constrained in areas
with steep topography or hard engineering structures (i.e., coastal
squeeze, Section 4.3.2.4). Seawalls, levees and dams can also prevent
the fluvial and marine transport of sediment to wetland areas and
reduce their resilience further (Giosan, 2014; Tessler et al, 2015; Day
et al., 2016; Spencer et al., 2016).

4,3.3.5.2 Coral reefs

Coral reefs are considered to be the marine ecosystem most
threatened by climate-related ocean change, especially ocean
warming and acidification, even under an RCP2.6 scenario (Gattuso
et al., 2015; Albright et al, 2018; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018; Diaz
et al., 2019; Section 5.3.4). AR5 concluded that ‘a number of coral
reefs could [...] keep up with the maximum rate of SLR of 15.1 mm
yr! projected for the end of the century [...] (medium confidence)
[but a future net accretion rate lower] than during the Holocene
(Perry et al., 2013) and increased turbidity (Storlazzi et al., 2011)
will weaken this capability (very high confidence)’ (Wong et al.,
2014: 379). Subsequently, some studies suggested that SLR may
have negligible impacts on coral reefs’ vertical growth because the
projected rate and magnitude of SLR by 2100 are within the potential
accretion rates of most coral reefs (van Woesik et al., 2015). Other
studies, however, stressed that the overall net vertical accretion of
reefs may decrease after the first 30 years of rise in a 1.2 m SLR
scenario (Hamylton et al. 2014), and that most reefs will not be able
to keep up with SLR under RCP4.5 and beyond (Perry et al., 2018). The
$R1.5 also concludes that coral reefs ‘are projected to decline by a
further 70-90% at 1.5°C (high confidence) with larger losses (>99%)
at 2°C (very high confidence)’ (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018: 10). A key
point is that SLR will not act in isolation of other drivers. Cumulative
impacts, including anthropogenic drivers, are estimated to reduce the
ability of coral reefs to keep pace with future SLR (Hughes et al.,
2017; Yates et al., 2017) and thereby reduce the capacity of reefs to
provide sediments and protection to coastal areas. For example, the
combination of reef erosion due to acidification and human-induced
mechanical destruction is altering seafloor topography, increasing
risks from SLR in carbonate sediment dominated regions (Yates et al.,
2017). Both ocean acidification (Albright et al, 2018; Eyre et al., 2018)
and ocean warming (Perry and Morgan, 2017) have been considered
to slow future growth rates and reef accretion (Section 5.3.4). Recent
literature also shows that alterations of coral reef 3D structure from
changes in growth, breakage, disease or acidification can profoundly
affect their ability to buffer waves impacts (through wave breaking
and wave energy damping), and therefore keep-up with SLR (Yates
et al., 2017; Harris et al., 2018). Such prospects contribute to raise
concerns about the future ability of atoll islands to adjust naturally
to SLR and persist (Section 4.3.3.3, Cross-Chapter Box 9). Another
concern is that locally, even minimal SLR can increase turbidity on
fringing reefs, reducing light and, therefore, photosynthesis and
calcification. SLR-induced turbidity can be caused by increased
coastal erosion and the transfer of sediment to nearby reefs and
enhanced sediment resuspension (Field et al., 2011).

379

 
 

Chapter 4

43.3.5.3 Seagrasses

Due to their natural capacity to enhance accretion and in the
absence of mechanical or chemical destruction by human activities,
seagrasses are not expected to be severely affected by SLR, except
indirectly through the increase of the impacts of extreme weather
events and waves on coastal morphology (i.¢., erosion) as well as
through changes in light levels and through effects on adjacent
ecosystems (Saunders et al., 2013). Extreme flooding events have
also been shown to cause large-scale losses of seagrass habitats
(Bandeira and Gell, 2003), for example seagrasses in Queensland,
Australia, were lost in a disastrous flooding event (Campbell and
McKenzie, 2004). Changes in ocean currents can have either positive
or negative effects on seagrasses, creating new space for seagrasses
to grow or eroding seagrass beds (Bjork et al, 2008). But overall,
seagrass will primarily be negatively affected by the direct effects
of increased sea temperature on growth rates and the occurrence
of disease (Marba and Duarte, 2010; Burge et al., 2013; Koch et al,
2013; Thompson et al., 2015; Chefaoui et al., 2018; Gattuso et al,
2018; Section 5.3.2) as well as by heavy rains that may dilute the
seawater to a lower salinity. Such impacts will be exacerbated by
major causes of seagrass decline including coastal eutrophication,
siltation and coastal development (Waycott et al, 2009). Noteworthy
is that some positive impacts are expected, as ocean acidification
is expected to benefit photosynthesis and growth rates of seagrass
(Repolho et al., 2017).

4.3.3.5.4 Coastal protection by coastal and marine ecosystems

Major ‘protection’ benefits derived from the above-mentioned coastal
ecosystems include wave attenuation and shoreline stabilisation,
for example, by coral reefs (Elliff and Silva, 2017; Siegle and Costa,
2017), mangroves (Zhang et al., 2012; Barbier, 2016; Menéndez et al.,
2018) or salt marshes (Moller et al., 2014; Hu et al., 2015). Recently,
a global meta-analysis of 69 studies demonstrated that, on average,
these ecosystems together reduced wave heights between 35-71%
at the limited locations considered (Narayan et al, 2016), with coral
reefs, salt marshes, mangroves and seagrass/kelp beds reducing wave
heights by 54-81%, 62-79%, 25-37% and 25-45% respectively
(see Narayan et al., 2016 for map of locations considered). Additional
studies suggest greater wave attenuation in mangrove systems
(Horstman et al., 2014), and highlight broader complexities in wave
attenuation related to total tidal wetland extent, water depth, and
species. Global analyses show that natural and artificial seagrasses
can attenuate wave height and energy by as much as 40% and 50%,
respectively (Fonseca and Cahalan, 1992; John et al., 2015), while
coral reefs have been observed to reduce total wave energy by 94—
98% (n = 13; Ferrario et al., 2014) and wave driven flooding volume
by 72% (Beetham et al., 2017). In addition, storm surge attenuation
based on a recent literature review by Stark et al. (2015) range from
-2-25 cm km length of marsh, where the negative value denotes
actual amplification. Other ecosystems provide coastal protection,
including macroalgae, oyster and mussel beds, and also beaches,
dunes and barrier islands, but there is less understanding of the
level of protection conferred by these other organisms and habitats
(Spalding et al., 2014).

380

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

While there is little literature on the extent to which SLR specifically
will affect coastal protection by coastal and marine ecosystems, it
is estimated that SLR may reduce this ecosystem service (limited
evidence, high agreement) through the above-described impacts on
the ecosystems themselves, and in combination with the impacts of
other climate-related changes to the ocean (e.g., ocean warming
and acidification; Sections 5.3.1 to 5.3.6, 5.4.1). Wave attenuation
by coral reefs, for example, is estimated to be negatively affected
in the near future by changes in coral reefs’ structural complexity
more than by SLR (Harris et al., 2018); changes in mean and ESL
events will rather add a layer of stress. Beck et al. (2018) estimate
that under RCP8.5 by 2100, a 1 m loss in coral reefs’ height will
increase the global area flooded under a 100-year storm event by
116% compared to today, against +66% with no reef loss.

4.3.3.6 Human Activities

4.3.3.6.1 Coastal agriculture

SLR will affect agriculture mainly through land submergence, soil
and fresh groundwater resources salinisation, and land loss due
to permanent coastal erosion, with consequences on production,
livelihood diversification and food security, especially in heavily
coastal agriculture-dependent countries such as Bangladesh
(Khanom, 2016). Recent literature confirms that salinisation is
already a major problem for traditional agriculture in deltas (Wong
et al, 2014; Khai et al., 2018) and low-lying island nations where
some edible cultivated plants such as taro patches are threatened
(Nunn et al., 2017b). Taking the case of rice cultivation, recent works
emphasise the prevailing role of combined surface elevation and soil
salinity, such as in the Mekong delta (Vietnam; Smajgl et al., 2015)
and in the Ebro delta (Spain; Genua-Olmedo et al., 2016), estimating
for the latter a decrease in the rice production index from 61.2% in
2010 to 33.8% by 2100 in a 1.8 m SLR scenario. For seven wetland
species occurring in coastal freshwater marshes in central Veracruz
on the Gulf of Mexico, an increase in salinity was shown to affect the
germination process under wetland salt intrusion (Sanchez-Garcia
et al, 2017). In coastal Bangladesh, oilseed, sugarcane and
jute cultivation was reported to be already discontinued due to
challenges to cope with current salinity levels (Khanom, 2016), and
salinity is projected to have an unambiguously negative influence
on all dry-season crops over the next 15-45 years (especially in the
southwest; Clarke et al, 2018; Kabir et al. 2018). Salinity intrusion
and salinisation can trigger land use changes towards brackish or
saline aquaculture such as shrimp or rice-shrimp systems with
impacts on environment, livelihoods and income stability (Renaud
et al, 2015). However, increasing salinity is only one of the land use
change drivers along with, for example, policy changes and market
prices at the household level (Renaud et al., 2015).

4,3.3.6.2 Coastal tourism and recreation

SLR may significantly affect tourism and recreation through impacts
on landscapes (e.g., beaches), cultural features (e.g., Marzeion and
Levermann, 2014; Fang et al., 2016), and critical transportation
infrastructures such as harbours and airports (Monioudi et al., 2018).
Coastal areas’ future tourism and recreation attractiveness will
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

however also depend on changes in air temperature, seasonality and
sea surface temperature (including induced effects such as invasive
species, e.g., jellyfishes, and disease spreading; Burge et al, 2014;
Weatherdon et al., 2016; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018; Section 5.4.2).
Future changes in climatic conditions in tourists’ areas of origin will
also play a role in reshaping tourism flows (Bujosa and Rosselld,
2013; Amelung and Nicholls, 2014), in addition to mitigation policies
on air transportation, non-climatic features (e.g., accommodation
and travel prices) and tourists’ and tourism developers’ perceptions
of climate-related changes (Shakeela and Becken, 2015). Since ARS,
forecasting the consequences of climate change effects on global-to-
local tourism flows has remained challenging (Rossellé-Nadal, 2014;
Wong et al., 2014; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018). There are also
concerns about the effect of SLR on tourism facilities, for example
hotels in Ghana (Sagoe-Addy and Addo, 2013), in a context where
tourism infrastructure often contributes to the degradation of
natural buffering environments through, for example, coastal
squeeze (eg., Section 4.3.2.4) and human-driven coastal erosion.
Again, forecasting is constrained by the lack of scientific studies on
tourism stakeholders’ long-term strategies and adaptive capacity
(Hoogendoorn and Fitchett, 2018).

4.3.3.6.3 Coastal fisheries and aquaculture

Recent studies support the AR5 conclusion that ocean warming and
acidification are considered more influential drivers of change in
fisheries and aquaculture than SLR (Larsen et al., 2014; Nurse et al.,
2014; Wong et al. 2014). The negative effects of SLR on fisheries
and aquaculture are indirect, through adverse impacts on habitats
(e.g., coral reef degradation, reduced water quality in deltas and
estuarine environments, soil salinisation, etc.), as well as on facilities
(e.g., damage to small and large harbours). This makes future
projections on SLR implications for coastal and marine fisheries and
aquaculture an understudied field of research. Conclusions only
state that future impacts will be highly context-specific due to local
manifestations of SLR and local fishery-dependent communities’
ability to adapt to alterations in fish and aquaculture conditions and
productivity (Hollowed et al., 2013; Weatherdon et al., 2016). Salinity
intrusion also contributes to conversion of land or freshwater ponds
to brackish or saline aquaculture in many low-lying coastal areas
of Southeast Asia such as in the Mekong Delta in Vietnam (Renaud
et al., 2015).

4.3.3.6.4 Social values

Social values refer to what people consider of critical importance
about the places in which they live, and range from material to
immaterial things (assets, beliefs, etc.; Hurlimann et al., 2014; Rouse
et al., 2017). Consideration of social values offers an opportunity
to address a wider perspective on impacts on human systems, for
example, complementary to quantitative assessments of health
impacts (eg., loss of source of calories and food insecurity; Keim,
2010). This also encompasses immaterial dimensions, such as
threats to cultural heritage (Marzeion and Levermann, 2014; Fatori¢
and Seekamp, 2017a), socialising activities (Karlsson et al, 2015),
integration of marginalised groups (Maldonado, 2015) and cultural
ecosystem services (Fish et al, 2016), and provides an opportunity to

Chapter 4

better reflect context-specificities in valuing the physical/ecological/
human/cultural impacts’ importance for and distribution within a
given society (Fatorié and Seekamp, 2017b). This field of research
(no detailed mention found in AR5) is just emerging due to the
transdisciplinary and qualitative nature of the topic. Graham et al.
(2013) advance a 5-category framing of social values specifically at
risk from SLR: health (ie., the social determinants of survival such as
environmental and housing quality and healthy lifestyles), feeling of
safety (e.g., financial and job security), belongingness (i.¢., attachment
to places and people), self-esteem (e.g., social status or pride that can
be affected by coastal retreat), and self-actualisation (i.¢., people's
efforts to define their own identity). Another emerging issue relates
to social values at risk due to land submergence in low-lying islands
(Yamamoto and Esteban, 2014) and parts of countries and individual
properties (Marino, 2012; Maldonado et al., 2013; Aerts, 2017;
Allgood and McNamara, 2017). Recent studies also highlight the
potential additional risks to social values in areas where displaced
people relocate (Davis et al., 2018).

4.3.4 Conclusion on Coastal Risk: Reasons for Concern

and Future Risks

SLR projections for the 21st century, together with other ocean
related changes (e.g., acidification and warming) and the possible
increase in human-driven pressures at the coast (e.g., demographic
and settlement patterns), make low-lying islands, coasts and
communities relevant illustrations of some of the five Reasons for
Concern (RFCs) developed by the IPCC since the Third Assessment
Report (McCarthy et al., 2001; Smith et al., 2001) to assess risks from
a global perspective. The AR5 Synthesis Report (IPCC, 2014) as well
as the more recent $R1.5 (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018) refined the
RFC approach. The ARS Synthesis Report (IPCC, 2014) developed two
additional RFCs related to the coasts, subsequently updated along
with the other RFCs (O'Neill et al., 2017). One refers to risks to marine
species arising from ocean acidification, and the other one refers to
risks to human and natural systems from SLR. Despite the difficulty in
attributing observed impacts to SLR per se (Section 4.3.3.1), O'Neill
et al. (2017) estimate that risks related to SLR are already detectable
globally and will increase rapidly, so that high risk may occur before
a 1m rise level is reached. O'Neill et al. (2017) also suggest that
limits to coastal protection and EbA by 2100 could occur in a 1m
SLR rise scenario. Previous assessments however left gaps, including
quantifying the benefits from adaptation in terms of risk reduction.
4.3.4.1. Methodological Advances

Rather than revisiting the AR5 and O'Neill et al. (2017) assessments
from the particular perspective of risk related to SLR and for the
global scale, this section provides a complementary perspective by
assessing risks for specific geographies (resource-rich coastal cities,
urban atoll islands, large tropical agricultural deltas and selected
Arctic communities), based on the methodological advances below.

Scale of analysis and geographical scope — To date, the RFCs and

associated burning embers have been developed at a global scale
(Oppenheimer et al., 2014; Gattuso et al., 2015; O'Neill et al., 2017)

381

 
 

Chapter 4

and do not address the spatial variability of risk highlighted in this
report (Sections 4.3.2.7, 4.3.4, 5.3.7, Cross-Chapter Box 9, Box 4.1).
In addition, assessments usually identify risks either for global human
dimensions (e.g., to people, livelihood, breakdown of infrastructures,
biodiversity, global economy, etc.; IPCC, 2014; Oppenheimer et al.,
2014; O'Neill et al., 2017) or for ecosystems and ecosystem services
(Gattuso et al., 2015; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018) (Section 5.3.7).
This section moves the focus from the global to more local scales
by considering four generic categories of low-lying coastal areas
(Figure 4.3, Panel B): selected Arctic communities remote from
regions of rapid GIA, large tropical agricultural deltas, urban atoll
islands, and resource-rich coastal cities. Each of these categories is
informed by several real-world case studies.

Risks considered — \n line with the AR5 (IPCC, 2014), current and
future risks result from the interaction of SLR-related hazards with
the vulnerability of exposed ecosystems and societies. According
to the specific scope of the chapter, this assessment focusses on
the additional risks due to SLR and does not account for changes
in extreme event climatology. Hazards considered are coastal
flooding (Section 4.3.4.2), erosion (Section 4.3.4.3) and salinisation
(Section 4.3.4.4). The proxies used to describe exposure and
vulnerability are the density of assets at the coast (Section 4.3.2.2)
and the level of degradation of natural buffering by marine and
terrestrial ecosystems (Sections 4.3.2.3, 4.3.3.5.4, and 5.3.2 to
5.3.4). The assessment especially addresses risks to human assets
at the coast, including populations, infrastructures and livelihoods.
Specific metrics were developed (see SM4.3 for details), and their
contribution to present-day observed impacts and to end-century risk
have been assessed based on the authors’ expert judgment and a
methodological grid presented in SM4.3 (SM4.3.1 to SM4.3.6). The
author's expert judgment draws on Sections 4.3.3.2 to 4.3.3.5 as well
as additional literature for local scale perspectives (SM4.3.9).

Sea level rise scenarios — Based on the updates for ranges and
mean values developed in this chapter (Section 4.2, Table 4.3), this
assessment considers the end-century GMSL (2100) relative to 1986-
2005 levels for two scenarios, SROCC RCP2.6 and SROCC RCP8.5.
Both mean values and the SROCC RCP8.5 upper end of the /ike/y range
are used to assess risk transitions (Figure 4.3, Panel A). For the sake
of readability, the following values were used: 43 cm (mean SROCC
RCP2.6), 84 cm (mean SROCC RCP8.5) and 110 cm (SROCC RCP8.5
upper end of /ikely range). While GMSL serves as a representation of
different possible climate change scenarios (see Panel A in Figure 4.3,
Section 4.1.2), the assessment of additional risks due to SLR
on specific geographies is developed against end-century relative SLR
(RSL) in order to allow a geographically accurate approach (Panel B,
Figure 4.3). Accordingly, risk was assessed to illustrative geographies
based on RSLs for each of the two SROCC RCP scenarios and each
of the real-world case studies to (SM4.3.6 and Table SM4.3.2; see
dotted lines in Panel B of Figure 4.3). RSL observations include some
or all of the following VLMs: both uplift (e.g., due to tectonics) and
subsidence due to natural (e.g., tectonics, sediment compaction)
and human (e.g., oil/gas/water extraction, mining activities) factors,
as well as to GIA. However, in SROCC, numerical RSL projections
only include GIA and the regional gravitational, rotational, and
deformational responses (GRD, see Section 4.2.1.5) to ice mass loss.

382

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

The main reason is the difficulty of projecting the influence on some
factors such as human interventions to the end of the century.

Adaptation scenarios — Risk will also depend on the effectiveness
of coastal societies’ responses to both extreme events and slow onset
changes. To capture the response dimension, four metrics have been
considered that refer to the implementation of adequately calibrated
hard, engineered coastal defences (Section 4.4.2.2), the restoration
of the degraded ecosystems or the creation of new natural buffers
areas (Section 4.4.2.2 and 4.4.2.3), planned and local-scale relocation
(Section 4.4.2.6), and measures to limit human-induced subsidence
(Sections 4.4.2.2, 4.4.2.5). On these bases, two contrasting adaptation
scenarios were considered. The first one is called ‘No-to-moderate
response’ (see (A) bars in Panel B, Figure 4.3) and represents a
business-as-usual scenario where no major additional adaptation
efforts compared to today are implemented. That is, neither
substantial intensification of current actions nor new types of actions,
eg., only moderate raising of existing protections in high-density
areas or sporadic episodes of relocation or beach nourishment where
largescale efforts are not already underway. The second one, called
‘Maximum potential response’ (bars (B) in Figure 4.3), refers to an
ambitious combination of both incremental and transformational
adaptation (i.e., significantly upscaled effort); for example, relocation
of entire districts or raised protections in some cities, or creation/
restoration at a significant scale of beach-dune systems including
indigenous vegetation.

4.3.4.2 Key Findings on Future Risks and Adaptation Benefits

4.3.4.2.1 Future risks

The findings suggest that risks from SLR are already detectable for all
of the geographies considered (Panel B in Figure 4.3), and that risk is
expected to increase over this century in virtually all low-lying coastal
areas whatever their context-specificities or nature (island/continental,
developed/developing county) (Cross-Chapter Box 9). In the absence
of high adaptation (bars (A)), risk is expected to significantly increase
in urban atoll islands and the selected Arctic coastal communities
even in a SROCC RCP2.6 scenario, and all geographies are expected
to experience almost high to very high risks at the upper /ikely range
of SROCC RCP8.5. These results allow refining AR5 conclusions by
showing, first, that high risk can indeed occur before the 1m rise
benchmark (Oppenheimer et al., 2014; O'Neill et al., 2017) and, second,
that risk as a function of SLR is highly variable from one geography
to another. Some rationale is provided below for our assessment of
illustrative geographies, summarising the more detailed description
provided in SM4.3 (SM4.3.6 to SM4.3.8). Note however that the
text below is not intended to be fully comprehensive and does not
necessarily include all elements for which there is a substantive body
of literature, nor does it necessarily include all elements which are of
particular interest to decision makers.

Resource-rich coastal cities (SM4.3.8.1, Panel B in Figure 4.3) -
Resource-rich coastal cities considered in this analysis are Shanghai,
New York (see Box 4.1 for further details and references on Shanghai
and NYC), and Rotterdam (Brinke et al., 2010; Hinkel et al., 2018).
High, and in many cases, growing population density and total
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

population, and high exposure of people and infrastructure to
GMSL rise and ESL events characterise coastal megacities (Hanson
et al, 2011). These are high concentrations of income and wealth
in geographic terms but within relatively small area exhibit large
distributional differences of both with important implications for
emergency response and adaptation. Concentration translates into
high exposure of monetary value to coastal hazards and the cities
noted here have both historical and recent experience with damaging
ESL events, such as Typhoon Winnie which struck Shanghai in 1997
(Xian et al., 2018), Hurricane Sandy in New York in 2012 (Rosenzweig
and Solecki, 2014), and the North Sea storm of 1953 which impacted
the Rotterdam area (Gerritsen, 2005; Jonkman et al., 2008). However,
high density, limited space and high cost of land leads to development
of below-ground space for transportation (e.g., subways, road
tunnels; MTA, 2017) and storage, and even habitation, creating
vulnerabilities not seen in low-density areas. Natural ecosystems
within the megacity boundaries and nearby have been exploited for
centuries and in some cases decimated or even extirpated (Hartig
et al., 2002). Accordingly, they provide limited benefits in terms of
coastal protection for the densest part of these cities but can be
critically important for protection of lower-density areas, for example,
wetlands and sandy beaches in the Jamaica Bay/Rockaway sector of
New York that protect nearby residential communities (Hartig et al.,
2002). Space limitations also constrain the potential benefits of EbA
measures. Instead, resource-rich coastal cities depend largely on
hard defences like sea walls and surge barriers for coastal protection
(Section 4.4.2.2). Such defences are costly but generally cost effective
due to the aforementioned concentration of population and value.
However, barriers to planning and implementing adaptation include
governance challenges (Section 4.4.2) such as limited control over
finances and the intermittent nature of ESLs which inhibit focused
attention over the long time scales needed to plan and implement
hard defences (Section 4.4.2.2). As a result, coastal adaptation for
resource-rich cities is uneven and the three presented here were
selected with a view toward exhibiting a range of current and
potential future effectiveness.

Urban atoll islands (SM4.3.8.2, Panel B in Figure 4.3) — The capital
islands (or groups of islands) of three atoll nations in the Pacific and
Indian Oceans are considered here: Fongafale (Funafuti Atoll, Tuvalu),
the South Tarawa Urban District (Tarawa Atoll, Kiribati) and Male’
(North Kaafu Atoll, Maldives). Urban atoll islands have low elevation
(<4 m above mean sea level; in South Tarawa, e.g., lagoon sides where
settlement concentrates are <1.80 m in elevation) (Duvat, 2013) and
are mainly composed of reef-derived unconsolidated material. Their
future is of nation-wide importance as they concentrate populations,
economic activities and critical infrastructure (airports, main
harbours). They illustrate the prominence of anthropogenic-driven
disturbances to marine and terrestrial ecosystems (e.g., mangrove
clearing in South Tarawa or human-induced coral reef degradation
through land reclamation in Male’; Duvat et al., 2013; Naylor, 2015)
and therefore to services such as coastal protection delivered by the
coral reef (i.¢., wave energy attenuation that reduces flooding and
erosion, and sediment provision that contributes to island persistence
over time) (McLean and Kench, 2015; Quataert et al., 2015; Elliff and
Silva, 2017; Storlazzi et al., 2018).

Chapter 4

The controlling factors of urban atoll islands’ future habitability are
the density of assets exposed to marine flooding and coastal erosion
(SM4.3.8.2), future trends in these hazards, and ecosystem response
to both ocean-climate related pressures and human activities. Urban
atoll islands already experience coastal flooding, for example,
in Male’ (Wadey et al., 2017) and Funafuti (Yamano et al., 2007;
McCubbin et al, 2015). Coastal erosion is also a major concern along
non-armoured shoreline in South Tarawa (Duvat et al., 2013) and
Fongafale (Onaka et al., 2017), but not in Male’ where surrounding
fortifications have extended along almost the entire shoreline
from several decades (Naylor, 2015). Salinisation already affects
groundwater lenses, but its contribution to risk varies from one case
to another, from low in Male’ (relying on desalinised seawater) to
important for human consumption and agriculture in South Tarawa
(Bailey et al, 2014; Post et al., 2018).

Together, high population densities (from ~3,200 people per km? in
South Tarawa to ~65,700 people per km? in Male’) (Government of the
Maldives, 2014; Mclver et al., 2015) and the concentration of critical
infrastructure and settlements in naturally low-lying flood-prone areas
already substantially contribute to coastal risk (Duvat et al., 2013; Field
et al., 2017). Even stabilised densities in the future would translate
into a substantial increase of risk under a 43cm GMSL tise. Risk will
also be exacerbated by the negative effects of ocean warming and
acidification, especially on coral reef and mangrove capacity to cope
with SLR (Pendleton et al., 2016; Van Hooidonk et al., 2016; Perry and
Morgan, 2017; Perry et al., 2018) (Sections 4.3.3.5, 5.3). In addition,
even small values of SLR will significantly increase risk to atoll islands’
aquifers (Bailey et al., 2016; Storlazzi et al, 2018). Finally, land scarcity
in atoll environments will exacerbate the importance of SLR induced
damages (on housing, agriculture and infrastructure especially)
and cascading impacts (on livelihoods, for example, as a result of
groundwater and soil salinisation).

Large tropical agricultural deltas (SM4.3.8.3, Panel B in
Figure 4.3) — River deltas considered in this analysis are the Mekong
Delta and the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna Delta. Both deltas
are large, low-lying and dominated by agricultural production. The
risk assessment to SLR considered the entire delta area (not only
the coastal fringe; see SM4.3.6 for explanation). High population
densities (1280 people per km? and 433 people per km? in the
Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna and Mekong deltas, respectively)
(Ericson et al, 2006; Government of the Maldives, 2014) and the
removal of natural vegetation buffers contribute to high exposure
rates to coastal flooding, erosion, and salinisation. Agricultural
production contributes to GDP strongly (Smajgl et al., 2015; Hossain
et al., 2018), making agricultural fields important assets. In both
deltas, mangroves are partially degraded (Ghosh et al., 2018;
Veettil et al, 2018) as well as other wetlands at the coast and
further inland (Quan et al., 2018a; Rahman et al, 2018). Currently,
riverine flooding dominates in both deltas (Auerbach et al., 2015;
Rahman and Rahman, 2015; Ngan et al., 2018). However, high tides
and cyclones can generate large coastal flooding events, especially
in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna Delta (Auerbach et al., 2015;
Rahman and Rahman, 2015). Human-induced subsidence increases
the likelihood of flooding in both deltas (Brown et al, 2018b).
Coastal and river bank erosion is already a problem in both delta

383

 
 

Chapter 4

(Anthony et al., 2015; Brown and Nicholls, 2015; Li et al., 2017) as
well as salinity intrusion, which is impacting coastal aquifers, soils
and surface waters (Anthony et al., 2015; Brown and Nicholls, 2015;
Li et al, 2017). Salinisation of water and soil resources remains a
coastal phenomenon (Smajgl et al., 2015), but salinity intrusion can
reach far inland in some extreme years and significantly contribute
to risk at the delta scale (Section 4.3.3.4.2). Both deltas are partly
protected with hard engineered defences such as dikes and sluice
gates to prevent riverine flooding, and polders and dikes in some
coastal stretches to prevent salinity intrusion and storm surges
(Smajgl et al., 2015; Rogers and Overeem, 2017; Warner et al.,
2018a). Today, in both deltas, the measures implemented to restore
natural buffers are still limited to mangroves ecosystems (Quan et al.,
2018a; Rahman et al., 2018), and the measures aiming at reducing
subsidence are underdeveloped (Schmidt, 2015; Schmitt et al,
2017). Assuming stable population densities in the future, coastal
flooding will contribute increasingly to risk at the delta level (Brown
and Nicholls, 2015; Brown et al., 2018a; Dang et al., 2018). Coastal
erosion will increase (Anthony et al., 2015; Liu et al., 2017a; Uddin
et al., 2019) and salinisation of coastal waters and soils will be more
significant (Tran Anh et al., 2018; Vu et al., 2018; Rakib et al., 2019)
and will strongly impact agriculture and water supply for the entire
delta (Jiang et al., 2018; Timsina et al., 2018; Nhung et al, 2019).
Without increased adaptation, coastal ecosystems will be largely
destroyed at 110 cm of SLR (Schmitt et al., 2017; Mehvar et al., 2019;
Mukul et al, 2019). Given the size of these deltas, it is only under
high emission scenarios, that flooding, erosion and salinisation lead
to high risk at the entire delta scale.

Arctic communities (SM4.3.8.4, Panel B in Figure 4.3) — Five small
indigenous settlements located on the Arctic Coastal Plain are
considered in this analysis: Bykovsky (Lena Delta, Russian Federation),
Shishmaref and Kivalina (Alaska, USA), and Shingle Point and
Tuktoyaktuk (Mackenzie Delta, Canada). They lie on exposed coasts
composed of unlithified ice-rich sediments in permafrost, in areas
with seasonal sea ice and slow to moderate SLR. These communities
have populations ranging from 380 to 900 (fewer and seasonal at
Shingle Point) that are heavily dependent on marine subsistence
resources (Forbes, 2011; Ford et al., 2016a). Shishmaref and Kivalina
are located on low-lying barrier islands highly susceptible to rising
sea level (Marino, 2012; Bronen and Chapin, 2013; Fang et al., 2018;
Rolph et al., 2018). Shingle Point is situated on an active gravel spit;
Tuktoyaktuk is built on low ground with high concentrations of
massive ice; and Bykovsky is mostly situated on an ice-rich eroding
terrace about 20 m above sea level. All the selected communities are
remote from regions of rapid positive GIA; many other areas in the
Arctic experience rapid GIA uplift ames et al., 2015; Forbes et al.,
2018) and have very low sensitivity to SLR, which may in fact help to
reduce shoaling.

Especially in the Arctic, anthropogenic drivers in recent decades
resulted in the induced settlement of indigenous peoples in
marginalised climate-sensitive communities (Ford et al. 2016b)
and the construction of infrastructure in nearshore areas, with the
assumption of stable coastlines. This resulted in increased exposure
to coastal hazards. Coastal erosion is already a major problem in
all of the case studies, where space for building is usually limited.

384

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Accelerating permafrost thaw is promoting rapid erosion of ice-rich
sediments, e.g., at Bykovsky (Myers, 2005; Lantuit et al., 2011;
Vanderlinden et al., 2018) and Tuktoyaktuk (Lamoureux et al., 2015;
Ford et al, 2016a). Related to this, Kivalina, Shishmaref, Shingle
Point, Tuktoyaktuk, and parts of the Lena delta (less so for Bykovsky)
are already facing high risk of flooding. Shishmaref, for example,
experienced 10 flooding events between 1973 and 2015 that resulted
in emergency declarations (Bronen and Chapin, 2013; Lamoureux
et al., 2015; Irrgang et al, 2019). There is however no evidence of
salinisation in the selected communities, but brackish water flooding
of the outer Mackenzie Delta caused by a 1999 storm surge (a rare
event due to upwelling ahead of the storm) led to widespread die-off
of vegetation with negative ecosystem impacts (Pisaric et al., 2011;
Kokelj et al., 2012).

Permafrost thaw is already accelerating due to increasing ground
temperatures that weaken the mechanical stability of frozen ground
(Section 3.4.2.2). Arctic SLR and sea surface warming have the
potential to substantially contribute to this thawing (Forbes, 2011;
Barnhart et al., 2014b; Lamoureux et al., 2015; Fritz et al., 2017).
An additional factor unique to the polar regions is the decrease
in seasonal sea ice extent in the Arctic (Sections 3.2.1 and 3.2.2),
which together with a lengthening open water season, provides less
protection from storm impacts, particularly later in the year when
storms are prevalent (Forbes, 2011; Lantuit et al., 2011; Barnhart
et al., 2014a; Melvin et al., 2017; Fang et al., 2018; Forbes, 2019) and
therefore reduces the physical protection of the land (Section 6.3.1.3).

4.3.4.2.2 Adaptation benefits

The assessment also shows that benefits in terms of risk reduction
over this century are to be expected from ambitious adaptation efforts
(bars (B), Sections 4.4.2, 4.4.3 and 4.4.3). In the case of resource-rich
coastal cities especially, adequately engineered coastal defences can
play a decisive role in reducing risk (Section 4.4.2.2, Box 4.1), for
example from high to moderate at the SROCC RCP8.5 upper /ikely
range. In other contexts, such as atoll islands for example, while
engineered protection structures will reduce risk of flooding, they will
not necessarily prevent seawater infiltration due to the permeable
nature of the island substratum. So even adequate coastal protection
would not eliminate risk (SM4.3.8.3). In urban atoll islands, large
tropical agricultural deltas and the selected Arctic communities,
ambitious adaptation efforts mixing adequate coastal defences, the
restoration and creation of buffering ecosystems (eg., coral reefs),
and a moderate amount of relocation are expected to reduce risk. For
resource-rich coastal cities, adequately engineered hard protection
can virtually eliminate risk of flooding up to 84 cm except for
residual risk of structural failure (Sections 4.4.2 to 4.4.5). Benefits
are relatively important in a 84 cm SLR scenario, as they reduce
tisk from high-to-very-high to moderate-to-high (atolls, Arctic) and
from moderate-to-high to moderate (deltas). These benefits become
more modest when approaching the upper /ikely range of SROCC
RCP8.5, and risk tends to return to high-to-very-high (atolls, Arctic)
levels once the 110 cm rise in sea level is reached. Noteworthy in
urban atoll islands, intensified proactive coastal relocation (eg.,
relocation of buildings and infrastructures that are very close to the
shoreline) is expected to play a substantial role in risk reduction
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

under all SLR scenarios. Proactive relocation can indeed compensate
for the increasing extent of coastal flooding and associated damages
(SM4.3.8.3). When taken to the extreme, relocation could lead to the
elimination of risk in situ, for example in the case of the relocation
of the full population of urban atoll islands either elsewhere in
the country (e.g., on another island) or abroad (ie. international
migration). This is an extreme situation where it is hard to distinguish
whether the measure is an impact of SLR (and ocean change more
broadly), for example, displacement, or an adaptation solution. In
addition, relocation of people displaces pressure to destination areas,
with a potential increase of risk for the latter. In other words, the
broader ‘coastal retreat’ category (Section 4.4.2.6) raises the issue
of the ‘limits to adaptation’, which is not represented in Figure 4.3.

These conclusions must be nuanced, first, by the fact that our
assessment does not consider either financial or social aspects that
can act as limiting factors to the development of adaptation options
(Sections 4.4.3 and 4.4.5), for instance, hard engineering coastal
defences (Hurlimann et al., 2014; Jones et al., 2014; Elrick-Barr et al.,
2017; Hinkel et al., 2018). However, from a general perspective,
these findings suggest that although ambitious adaptation will
not necessarily eradicate end-century risk from SLR across all
low-lying coastal areas around the world, it will help to buy time
in many locations and therefore contribute to developing a robust
foundation for adaptation beyond 2100. Second, the future of other
climate-related drivers of risk (such as ESL, waves and cyclones;
Sections 4.2.3.4.1 to 4.2.3.4.3, 6.3.1.1 to 6.3.1.3) is not fully and
systematically included in each risk assessment above, so that much
larger risks than assessed here are to be expected.

Box 4.3 | Responses to Sea Level Rise

Chapter 4

4.4 Responding to Sea Level Rise

4.4.1 Introduction

SLR responses refer to legislation, plans and actions undertaken to
reduce risk and build resilience in the face of SLR (see Cross-Chapter
Box 3 in Chapter 1). These responses range from protecting the coast,
accommodating SLR impacts, retreating from the coast, advancing
into the ocean by building seawards and EbA (Box 4.3). Identifying
the most appropriate way to respond to SLR is not straightforward
and is politically and socially contested with a range of governance
challenges (also called barriers) arising. This section first assesses
the post-AR5 literature on the different types of SLR responses
(Le, protection, accommodation, advance, retreat and EbA) in terms
of their effectiveness, technical limits, costs, benefits, co-benefits,
drawbacks, economic efficiency and barriers, and the specific
governance challenges associated with each type of response
(Section 4.4.2). It then identifies a set of overarching governance
challenges that arise from the nature of SLR, such as its long-term
commitment and uncertainty, and the associated politically and
socially contested choices that need to be made (Section 4.4.3). Next,
planning, public participation, conflict resolution and decision analysis
approaches and tools are assessed that, when applied in combination,
can help to address the governance challenges identified, facilitating
social choices about SLR responses (Section 4.4.4). Finally, enablers
and lessons learned from practical efforts to implement SLR responses
are assessed (Section 4.4.5), concluding with a synthesis emphasising
the utility of climate resilient development pathways (Section 4.4.6).

 

Protection reduces coastal risk and impacts by blocking the inland propagation and other effects of mean or extreme sea levels (ESL).
This includes: i) hard protection such as dikes, seawalls, breakwaters, barriers and barrages to protect against flooding, erosion and
salt water intrusion (Nicholls, 2018), ii) sediment-based protection such as beach and shore nourishment, dunes (also referred to as
soft structures), and iii) ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) (see below). The three subcategories are often applied in combination as
so-called hybrid measures. Examples are a marsh green-belt in front of a sea wall, or a sea wall especially designed to include niches
for habitat formation (Coombes et al., 2015).

Accommodation includes diverse biophysical and institutional responses that mitigate coastal risk and impacts by reducing the
vulnerability of coastal residents, human activities, ecosystems and the built environment, thus enabling the habitability of coastal
zones despite increasing levels of hazard occurrence. Accommodation measures for erosion and flooding include building codes, raising
house elevation (e.g., on stilts), lifting valuables to higher floors and floating houses and gardens (Trang, 2016). Accommodation
measures for salinity intrusion include changes in land use (e.g., rice to brackish/salt shrimp aquaculture) or changes to salt tolerant
crop varieties. Institutional accommodation responses include EWS, emergency planning, insurance schemes and setback zones (Nurse
et al., 2014; Wong et al., 2014).

Advance creates new land by building seaward, reducing coastal risks for the hinterland and the newly elevated land. This includes land
reclamation above sea levels by land filling with pumped sand or other fill material, planting vegetation with the specific intention to
support natural accretion of land and surrounding low areas with dikes, termed polderisation, which also requires drainage and often
pumping systems (Wang et al., 2014; Donchyts et al., 2016).

Retreat reduces coastal risk by moving exposed people, assets and human activities out of the coastal hazard zone. This includes the

following three forms: i) Migration, which is the voluntary permanent or semi-permanent movement by a person at least for one year
(Adger et al., 2014). ii) Displacement, which refers to the involuntary and unforeseen movement of people due to environment-related

385
   

Chapter 4 Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities
Box 4.3 (continued)
q
b} Advance

(a) No response . (b) 5 5

SLR SLR

4

(c} Protection . (d} Retreat

SLR
(e) Accommodation : (f} Ecosystem-based adaptation

SLR

SLR &

Box 4.3, Figure 1| Different types of responses to coastal risk and sea level rise (SLR).

impacts or political or military unrest (Black et al., 2013; Islam and Khan, 2018; McLeman, 2018; Mortreux et al., 2018). iii) Relocation,
also termed resettlement, managed retreat or managed realignment, which is typically initiated, supervised and implemented by
governments from national to local levels and usually involves small sites and/or communities (Wong et al., 2014; Hino et al., 2017;
Mortreux et al., 2018). Managed realignment may also be conducted for the purpose of creating new habitat. These three sub-categories
are not neatly separable— any household's decision to retreat may be ‘voluntary’ in theory, but in practice, may result from very limited
choices. Displacement certainly occurs in response to extreme events but some of those retreating may have other options. Relocation
programs may rely on incentives such as land buyouts that households adopt voluntarily. The need for retreat and other response
measures can be reduced by avoiding new development commitments in areas prone to severe SLR hazards (Section 4.4.4.2).

Ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) responses provide a combination of protect and advance benefits based on the sustainable
management, conservation and restoration of ecosystems (Van Wesenbeeck et al., 2017). Examples include the conservation or
restoration of coastal ecosystems such as wetlands and reefs. EbA measures protect the coastline by (i) attenuating waves, and, in
the case of wetlands storm surge flows, by acting as obstacles and providing retention space (Krauss et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2012;
Vuik et al., 2015; Rupprecht et al., 2017); and (ii) by raising elevation and reducing rates of erosion through trapping and stabilising
coastal sediments (Shepard et al., 2011), as well as building-up of organic matter and detritus (Shepard et al., 2011; Mclvor et al,
2012a; Mclvor et al., 2012b; Cheong et al., 2013; Mclvor et al., 2013; Spalding et al., 2014). EbA is also referred to by various other
names, including Natural and Nature-based Features, Nature-based Solutions, Ecological Engineering, Ecosystem-based Disaster
Risk Reduction or Green Infrastructure (Bridges, 2015; Pontee et al., 2016).

 

4.4.2 Observed and Projected Responses, retreat may or may not be meaningfully considered to be adaptation
their Costs, Benefits, Co-benefits, (Hinkel et al., 2018). Responses that address the causes of climate
Drawbacks, Efficiency and Governance change, such as mitigating GHGs or geoengineering temperature and

sea level responses to emissions fall beyond the scope of this chapter,
4.4.2.1 Types of Responses and Framework for Assessment and are addressed in $R1.5 (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018). In coastal
areas where anthropogenic subsidence contributes to relative SLR,

Following earlier IPCC Reports Protection, Retreat and another important type of response is the management of subsidence

Accommodation responses to SLR and its impacts are distinguished
between (Nicholls et al, 2007; Wong et al., 2014), and Advance is
added as a fourth type of response that consists in building seaward
and upward (Box 4.3). Advance had not received much attention in
the climate change literature but plays an important role in coastal
development across the world (eg., Institution of Civil Engineers,
2010; Lee, 2014; Donchyts et al., 2016). The broader term response
is used here instead of adaptation, because some responses such as

386

by, for instance, restricting ground fluid abstraction. Although this
type of measure is considered in the risk assessment developed in
Section 4.3.4, it is not assessed here due to a lack of space.

Observed coastal responses are rarely responses to climate-change
induced SLR only, but also to relative SLR caused by land subsidence
as well as current coastal risks and many socioeconomic factors and
related hazards. As a consequence, coastal responses have been
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

practised for centuries, and there are many experiences specifically in
places that have subsided up to several metres due to earthquakes
or anthropogenic ground fluid abstraction in the last century that
responding to climate-change induced SLR can draw upon (Esteban
et al, 2019). Finally, in practise, many responses are hybrid, applying
combinations of protection, accommodation, retreat, advance and EbA.

Since ARS5, the literature on SLR responses has grown significantly. It
is assessed in this section for the five above-described broad types of
responses in terms of the following six criteria:

© Observed responses across geographies, describing where the
different types of responses have been implemented.

© Projected responses, which refers to the potential extent of
responses in the future, as assessed in the literature through
modelling or in a more qualitative way.

© Cost of responses, which refers to the costs of implementing
and maintaining responses. Other costs that arise due to negative
side-effects of implementing a response are captured under the
criterion ‘co-benefits and drawbacks’.

e Effectiveness of responses in terms of reducing SLR risks and
impacts. This includes biophysical and technical limits beyond
which responses cease to be effective.

© Co-benefits and drawbacks of responses that occur next to the
intended benefits of reducing SLR risks and impacts.

© Governance challenges (or barriers), which refers to
institutional and organisational factors that have been found to
hinder the effective, efficient and equitable implementation of
responses (see also Section 4.4.3).

e Economic efficiency of responses, which refers to the overall
monetised balance of costs, benefits (in terms of the effectiveness
of responses), co-benefits and drawbacks. Economic barriers arise
if responses have a negative net benefit or a benefit-cost ratio
smaller than one. While it would be desirable to have information
on the economic efficiency of integrated responses combining
different response types, an assessment cannot be provided here
due to the lack of literature.

4.4.2.2 Hard and Sediment-Based Protection

4.4.2.2.1_ Observed hard and sediment-based protection

across geographies

Coastal protection through hard measures is widespread around
the world, although it is difficult to provide estimates on how many
people benefit from them. Currently, at least 20 million people
living below normal high tides are protected by hard structures (and
drainage) in countries such as Belgium, Canada, China, Germany,
Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Poland, Thailand, the UK, and the
USA (Nicholls, 2010). Many more people living above high tides are
also protected against ESL by hard structures in major cities around
the world. There is a concentration of these measures in northwest
Europe and East Asia, although extensive defences are also found in
and around many coastal cities and deltas. For example, large scale
coastal protection exists in Vancouver (Canada), Alexandria (Egypt)
and Keta (Ghana; Nairn et al, 1999) and 6000 km of polder dikes

Chapter 4

in coastal Bangladesh. Gittman et al. (2015) estimate that 14% of
the total US coastline has been armoured, with New Orleans being
an example of an area below sea level dependent on extensive
engineered protection (Kates et al., 2006; Rosenzweig and Solecki,
2014; Cooper et al., 2016). Defences built and raised for tsunami
protection, such as post-2011 in Japan (Raby et al, 2015), also
provide protection against SLR.

The application of sediment-based protection measures also has
a long history, offering multiple benefits in terms of enhancing
safety, recreation and natural systems (JSCE, 2000; Dean, 2002;
Hanson et al., 2002; Cooke et al., 2012). About 24% of the world’s
sandy beaches are currently eroding by rates faster than 0.5 m yr
(Luijendijk et al., 2018). In the USA, Europe and Australia, these
responses are often driven by the recreational value of beaches and
the high economic benefits associated with beach tourism. More
recently, sediment-based measures are implemented as effective
and yet flexible measures to address SLR (Kabat et al., 2009) and
experiments are being conducted with innovative decadal scale
application of sediments such as the sand engine in the Netherlands
(Stive et al., 2013).

There is high confidence that most major upgrades in defences
happen after coastal disasters (Box 4.1). Dikes were raised and
reienforced after the devastating coastal flood of 1953 in the
Netherlands and the UK, and in 1962 in Germany. In New Orleans,
investments in the order of 15 billion USD, including a major storm
surge barrier, followed Hurricane Katrina in 2005 (Fischetti, 2015),
and in New York the Federal Government made available 16 billion
USD for disaster recovery and adaptation after Superstorm Sandy
in 2012 (NYC, 2015). Examples in which SLR has been considered
proactively in the planning process include SLR safety margins in, for
example, the UK, Germany and France, upgrading defences according
to cost-benefit analysis in the Netherlands, and SLR guidance in the
USA (USACE, 2011).

4.4,2.2.2 Projected hard and sediment-based protection

There is high confidence that hard coastal protection will continue
to be a widespread response to SLR in densely populated and
urban areas during the 21st century, because this response is
widely practised (Section 4.4.2.2.2), effective in reducing current
(Section 4.4.2.2.2) and future flood risk (Section 4.3.3.2) and highly
cost efficient in urban and densely populated areas (Section 4.4.2.7).
There is, however, jow agreement on the level of hard coastal
protections to expect, with projections being based on different
assumptions. A model assuming that coastal societies upgrade hard
protection following scenario-based cost-benefit analysis finds that
22% of the global coastline will be protected under various SSPs and
1 m of 21st century global mean SLR (Nicholls et al., 2019). Another
model assuming that only areas for which benefit-cost ratios are
above 1 under SLR scenarios up to 2 m, all SSPs and discount rates
up to 6%, finds that this would lead to protecting 13% of the global
coastline (Lincke and Hinkel, 2018; Figure 4.14).

387

 
 

Chapter 4

Table 4.7 | Capital and maintenance costs of hard protection measures.

Measure

Capital cost (in million USD unless stated otherwise)

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Annual Maintenance Cost (% of capital cost)

 

 

 

Sea Wall 0.4-27.5 per km length and metre height (Linham et al., 2010) 1-2% per annum (Jonkman et al., 2013)
0.9-69.9 per km length and metre height (onki t al., 2013; Nicholl:

Sea Dike ee cuneate enon 1-2% per annum (Jonkman et al., 2013)
et al., 2019; Tamura et al., 2019)

Breakwater 2.5-10.0 per km length {Narayan et al., 2016) 1% per annum (Jonkman et al., 2013)

 

Storm S Barri
orm surge Barrier EUR per metre width

0.9-2.7 Jonkman et al., 2013) or 2.2 (Mooyaart and Jonkman, 2017) million

1% per annum {Mooyaart and Jonkman, 2017) or 5-10% per annum
{Nicholls et al., 2007)

 

Saltwater

. . Limited knowledge
Intrusion Barriers

 

 

Limited knowledge

 

 

 

4.4.2.2.3 Cost of hard and sediment-based protection

There is medium evidence and medium agreement on the costs of
hard protection. Data on the costs of hard defences is only available
for few countries and unit costs estimated from this data vary
substantially depending on building/fill material used, labour cost,
urban versus rural settings, hydraulic loads, etc. (Jonkman et al., 2013;
Lenk et al., 2017; Aerts, 2018; Nicholls et al., 2019). In general, there
has been limited systematic data collection across sites, although
useful national guidance does exist in some cases (Environment
Agency, 2015). Defences depend on good maintenance to remain
effective. For some types of infrastructure such as surge barriers,
maintenance costs are poorly described and hence more uncertain
(Nicholls et al. 2007). Protection-based adaptation to saltwater
intrusion is more complex than adaptation to flooding and erosion,
and there is less experience to draw upon.

Based on these unit cost estimates, and different assumptions
on future protection, global annual protection costs have been
estimated to be 12-71 billion USD considering coastal dikes only
(Hinkel et al., 2014) and about 40-170 billion USD yr considering
coastal dikes, river dikes and storm surge barriers, under RCP2.6, and
about 25-200 billion USD yr“ considering coastal dikes only (Tamura
et al. 2019) under RCP8.5. If protection is widely practised through
the 21st century, the bulk of the costs will be maintenance rather
than capital costs (Nicholls et al., 2019).

Sediment-based measures are generally costed as the unit cost of
sand (or gravel) delivery multiplied by the volumetric demand. Unit
costs range from 3-21 USD mr? sand, with some high outlier costs
in, for example, the UK, South Africa and New Zealand (Linham
et al., 2010; Aerts, 2018). Costs are small where sources of sand are
plentiful and close to the sites of demand. Costs are further reduced
by shoreface nourishment approaches. The Netherlands maintains its
entire open coast with large-scale shore nourishment (Mulder et al.,
2011) and the innovative sand engine has been implemented as a
full-scale decadal experiment (Stive et al., 2013). The capital costs
for dunes are similar to beach nourishment, although placement and
planting vegetation may raise costs. Maintenance costs vary from
almost nothing to several million USD km-', although costs are
usually at the lower end of this range (Environment Agency, 2015).

388

4.4.2.2.4 Effectiveness of hard and sediment-based protection

There is high confidence that well designed and maintained hard and
sediment-based protection is very effective in reducing risk to the
impacts of SLR and ESL (Horikawa, 1978; USACE, 2002; CIRIA, 2007).
This includes situations in which coastal megacities in river deltas have
experienced, and adapted to, relative SLR of several metres caused by
land subsidence during the 20th century (Kaneko and Toyota, 2011;
Esteban et al., 2019; Box 4.1). In principle, there are no technological
limits to protect the coast during the 21st century even under high-end
SLR of 2 m (Section 4.3.3.2), but technological challenges can make
protection very expensive and hence unaffordable in some areas
(Hinkel et al, 2018). Examples include southeast Florida, because
protected areas can be flooded by rising groundwater through
underlying porous limestone (Bloetscher et al., 2011). Gradually rising
water tables behind defences is also an issue, which can be managed
by increasing pumping and drainage (Aerts, 2018). Maintaining this
effectiveness over time requires regular monitoring and maintenance,
accounting for changing conditions such as SLR and widespread
erosional trends in front of the defences. There will always be residual
risks, which can be reduced, but never eliminated, by engineering
protection infrastructure to very high standards, such as so-called
‘unbreakable dikes’ (de Bruijn et al., 2013).

It is difficult to assess at what point in time and for which amount
of SLR technical limits for coastal protection will be reached. Parts of
Tokyo have been protected against five metres of relative SLR during
the 21st century (Kaneko and Toyota, 2011) and it has been argued
that it is possible to preserve territorial integrity of the Netherlands
even under 5 m SLR, using current engineering technology (Aerts
et al., 2008; Olsthoorn et al, 2008). This suggests that under RCP2.6,
technical limits to adaptation will be rare even under longer-term
SLR. Protecting against high-end SLR will be increasingly technically
challenging as we move beyond the 21st century. This is not only due
to the absolute amount of SLR, but also due to the very high rates of
annual SLR (e.g., 10-20 mm yr" fikely range under RCP8.5 in 2100),
which challenge the planning and implementation of hard protection
because major protection infrastructure requires decades to plan and
implement (Gilbert et al., 1984; Burcharth et al., 2014). In summary,
the higher and faster SLR, the more challenging coastal protection
will be, but quantifying this is difficult. In any case, before technical
limits are reached, economic and social limits will be reached because
societies are neither economically able nor socially willing to invest in
coastal protection (Sections 4.4.2.2 and 4.3.3.2; Hinkel et al., 2018;
Esteban et al., 2019).
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

4.4.2.2.5  Co-benetits and drawbacks of hard
and sediment-based protection

When space is limited (e.g., in an urban setting), co-benefits can
be generated through multi-functional hard flood defences, which
combine flood protection with other urban functions, such as car
parks, buildings, roads or recreational spaces into one multifunctional
structure (Stalenberg, 2013; van Loon-Steensma and Vellinga, 2014).
An important co-benefit of sediment-based protection, such as beach
nourishment and dune management, is that it preserves beach and
associated environments, as well as tourism (Everard et al., 2010;
Hinkel et al., 20134; Stive et al., 2013).

Drawbacks of hard protection include the alteration of hydrodynamic
and morphodynamic patterns, which in turn may export flooding and
erosion problems downdrift (Masselink and Gehrels, 2015; Nicholls
et al., 2015). For example, protection of existing shoreline in estuaries
and tidal creeks may increase tidal amplification in the upper parts
(Lee et al., 2017). Hard protection also hinders or prohibits the
onshore migration of geomorphic features and ecosystems (called
coastal squeeze; Pontee, 2013; Gittman et al., 2016), leading to both
a loss of habitat as well as of the protection function of ecosystems
(see Sections 4.3.2.4 and 4.4.2.2). Another drawback of raising
hard structures, also emphasised in ARS, is the risk of lock-in to a
development pathway in which development intensifies behind
higher and higher defences, with escalating severe consequences in
the event of protection failure (Wong et al., 2014; Welch et al., 2017),
as experienced in Hurricane Katrina impacted New Orleans (Burby,
2006; Freudenburg et al., 2009). This lock-in results from protection
attracting further economic development in the flood zone within
defenses, which then leads to further raising defences with SLR, and
the growing value of exposed assets.

Seabed dredging of sand and gravel can have negative impacts on
marine ecosystems such as seagrass meadows and corals (Erftemeijer
and Lewis Ill, 2006; Erftemeijer et al, 2012). Nourishment practices
on sandy beaches have also been shown to have drawbacks for local
ecosystems if local habitat factors are not taken into consideration
when planning and implementing nourishment and maintenance
(Speybroeck et al., 2006). A further emerging issue is beach material
scarcity mainly driven by demand of sand and gravel for construction,
but also for beach and shore nourishment (Peduzzi, 2014; Torres
et al, 2017), which makes sourcing the increasing volumes of
beach materials required to sustain beaches in the face of SLR more
expensive and challenging (Roelvink, 2015).

4.4.2.2.6 Governance of hard and sediment-based protection

Reviews and comparative case studies confirm findings of AR5 that
governance challenges are amongst the most common hindrance to
implementing coastal measures (Ekstrom and Moser, 2014; Hinkel
et al., 2018). One main issue to resolve is conflicting stakeholder
interests. This includes conflicts between those favouring protection
and those being negatively affected by adaptation measures.
In Catalonia, for example, the tourism sector welcomes beach
nourishment because it provides direct benefits, whereas those
dependent upon natural resources (e.g., fishermen) are increasingly

Chapter 4

in opposition because they fear that sand mining destroys coastal
habitat and livelihood prospects (Gonzalez-Correa et al., 2008).

There is also conflict related to the distribution of public money
between communities receiving public support for adaptation and
non-coastal communities who pay for this support through taxes
(Elrick-Barr et al., 2015). Generally, access to financial resources
for adaptation, including from public sources, development and
climate finance or capital markets, frequently constrain adaptation
(Ekstrom and Moser, 2014; Hinkel et al., 2018). For example,
homeowners are often not willing to pay taxes or levies for public
protection or sediment-base measures even if they directly benefit,
as found, for example in communities on the US east coast where
beach nourishment is used to maintain recreational and tourism
amenities (Mullin et al., 2019). In many parts of the world, coastal
adaptation governance is further complicated by existing conflicts
over resources. For example, illegal coastal sand mining is currently a
major driver of coastal erosion in many parts of the developing world
(Peduzzi, 2014). Examples of this can be found in Ghana (Addo, 2015)
and the Comoros (Betzold and Mohamed, 2017).

An associated governance challenge is ensuring the effective
maintenance of coastal protection. Ineffective maintenance has
contributed to many coastal disasters in the past, such as in
New Orleans (Andersen, 2007). AR5 highlighted that effective
maintenance is challenging in a small island context due to a lack
of adequate funds, policies and technical skills (Nurse et al., 2014).
In some countries in which coastal defence systems have a long
history, effective governance arrangements for maintenance, such as
the Water Boards in the Netherlands, have emerged. In Bangladesh,
where Dutch-like polders were introduced in the 1960s, maintenance
has been a challenge due to shifts in multi-level governance
structures associated with independence, national policy priorities
and donor involvement (Dewan et al., 2015).

4.4.2.2.7 Economic efficiency of hard
and sediment-based protection

At global scales, new economic assessments of responses have
mostly focused on the direct costs of hard protection and the
benefits of reducing coastal extreme event flood risks. These studies
confirm AR5 findings that the benefits of reducing coastal flood
risk through hard protection exceed the costs of protection, on a
global average, and for cities and densely populated areas, during
the 21st century even under high-end SLR (medium evidence, high
agreement; Hallegatte et al., 2013; Wong et al., 2014; Diaz, 2016;
Lincke and Hinkel, 2018). For example, Lincke and Hinkel (2018) find
that, during the 21st century, it is economically efficient to protect
13% of the global coastline, which corresponds to 90% of global
floodplain population, under SLR scenarios from 0.3-2.0 m, five
SSPs and discount rates up to 6% (Figure 4.14). While the above
two studies have not considered the effects of hard protection in
reducing the area of coastal wetlands, it is expected that coastal hard
protection in densely populated areas and conserving wetlands in
sparsely populated areas can go hand in hand. Protecting less than
42% of the global coastline would leave coastal wetlands sufficient
accommodation space to even grow in areas under rising sea levels

389

 
 

Chapter 4

during the 21st century (Schuerch et al, 2018). Diaz (2016), who
includes the cost of wetland loss, using a simpler wetland model,
finds that both protection and retreat reduce the global net present
costs of SLR by a factor of seven as compared to no adaptation
(applying a discount rate of 4%) under 21st century SLR of 0.3-1.3 m
and SSP2. There is no global study that has considered social costs
and benefits of responses (e.g., health, beach amenity, etc.) or looked
at the economics of accommodate, retreat and advance responses.

At local scales, a large number of economic assessments of response
options are available but mostly in the grey literature and again with
a focus on hard and sediment-based protection. Similar to the global
studies, hard protection is generally found to be economically efficient
for urban and densely populated areas such as New York, USA (Aerts
et al, 2014) and Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam (Scussolini et al, 2017).
Both global and local studies show that sediment-based protection,
such as beach nourishment is economically efficient in areas of
intensive tourism development due to the large revenues generated
within this sector (Rigall-|-Torrent et al., 2011; Hinkel et al, 2013a).
4.4.2.3. Ecosystem-based Adaptation
4.4.2.3.1 Observed ecosystem-based adaptation
across geographies

Relative to hard adaptation measures whose global distribution
is not known in detail (Scussolini et al., 2015), the current global
distribution of coastal ecosystems is well-studied (eg., for
saltmarshes and mangroves, respectively; Giri et al, 2011; Mcowen

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

et al., 2017). EbA, by definition, can only exist and function where
the environmental conditions are appropriate for a given ecosystem.
Mangroves, salt marshes and reefs occur along about 40-50% of the
world’s coastlines (Wessel and Smith, 1996; Burke, 2011; Giri et al.,
2011; Mcowen et al., 2017). However, there is no clear estimate on
the global length of coastline covered by ecosystems relevant for
EbA in the face of SLR in part because of a mismatch between the
spatial resolutions of different estimates available. Mangroves occur
on tropical and subtropical coasts, and cover 138,000-152,000 km?
across about 120 countries (Spalding et al., 2010; Giri et al., 2011).
At least 150,000 km of coastline in over 100 countries benefit from
the presence of coral reefs (Burke, 2011) and these are estimated to
protect over 100 million people from wave-induced flooding globally
(Ferrario et al., 2014). The extent of other coastal habitats is less well
known: salt marshes are estimated to occur in 99 countries, especially
in temperature to high latitude locations, with nearly 5,500,000 ha
mapped across 43 countries (Mcowen et al., 2017).

Since AR5 there has been growing recognition of the value of
conserving existing coastal ecosystems, and where possible restoring
them, for the flood protection and multiple other benefits they
provide (Temmerman et al., 2013; Arkema et al., 2015). In parallel,
EbA measures are increasingly being incorporated and required
within national plans, strategies and targets (Lo, 2016), international
adaptation funding mechanisms, such as the Adaptation Fund (AF;
e.g., in Sri Lanka and India; Epple et al., 2016), and national natural
capital valuations (Beck and Lange, 2016). Given their relative
novelty, there is widespread interest in building and collecting
knowledge of EbA implementation case-studies and examples

 

 

(Eee

0% 25%

50% 75% 100%

Percentage of scenarios with benefit-cost ratio of protection >1

Figure 4.14 | Economic robustness of coastal protection under sea level rise (SLR) scenarios from 0.3-2.0 m, the five Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs) and discount
rates of up to 6%. Coastlines are coloured according to the percentage of scenarios under which the benefit-cost ratio of protection (reduced flood risk divided by the cost

of protection) are above 1. Source: Lincke and Hinkel (2018).

390
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

(Table 4.7). Meanwhile, coastal communities around the globe are
already implementing EbA responses at local scales, with emphasis
on community participation and ownership and local priorities, needs
and capacities (Reid, 2016; see Section 4.4.4.4).

EbA has been used as an integral part of some retreat, advance
and accommodation responses. For example, on coastlines where
high-risk properties are relocated inland, space can be made for
ecosystem restoration to enhance natural biodiversity and provide
coastal protection (French, 2006; Coastal Protection and Restoration
Authority of Louisiana, 2017). There are also examples of ecosystem
restoration to advance coastlines and build land elevation (Chung,
2006). EbA can also be an element of accommodation responses by,
for example, restoring or creating marshes to provide space for flood
water (Temmerman et al., 2013).

4.4,2.3.2 Projected ecosystem-based adaptation

While there are projections available of ecosystem responses
to climate change and SLR (Section 4.3.3), to date, there are no
large-scale projections available on the future extent of EbA. However,
several coastal nations, particularly Small Island Developing States
(SIDS) explicitly advocate EbA measures as a means to address future
coastal hazard and SLR concerns. Based on Nationally Determined
Contributions (NDCs) submitted to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), more than 30 SIDS cite
EbA as a preferred SLR response, with mangrove planting being the
most common measure (Wong, 2018).

4.4,.2.3.3 Cost of ecosystem-based adaptation

There is limited evidence and low agreement on the costs of
ecosystem-based measures to make generally valid estimations
of the unit costs across large spatial scales. The total cost of an
ecosystem-based measure includes capital costs, maintenance costs,
the cost of land and, in some situations, permitting costs (Bilkovic,
2017). The costs of restoring and maintaining coastal habitats depend
on coastal setting, habitat type and project conditions. In general, unit
restoration costs are lowest for mangroves, higher for salt marshes and
oyster reefs, and highest for seagrass beds and coral reefs (Table 4.8).

Table 4.8 | Costs of ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA). MPA is marine protected area.

aT OME TCy Capital Costs

Wetland Conservation (Marshes/

we No data available
Mangroves, Maritime Forests)

Chapter 4

The conservation of coral reefs and other coastal habitats may
also entail substantial opportunity costs because alternative uses
of this land, such as through agricultural production, industry and
settlements, are generally of high economic value (Stewart et al.,
2003; Balmford et al., 2004; Adams et al., 2011; Hunt, 2013). The high
value of these alternative uses are the reason why globally, coastal
ecosystems are amongst the ecosystems that face the highest rates
of anthropogenic destruction, with estimated annual losses of 1-3%
of mangroves area, 2-5% seagrass area and 4-9% corals (Duarte
et al., 2013). Conserving these areas means reversing these trends.

Under the right conditions, and to some extent, EbA measures are
free of maintenance costs, because they respond and adapt to
changes in their coastal environment. However, maintenance can
become important in the aftermath of damage by storms or human
action, for example, when wetlands and reefs can be damaged by
high winds, waves and surges, or affected by dredging operations
(Smith Ill et al, 2009; Puotinen et al., 2016). At present, there is
limited evidence about the conditions under which EbA measures
can self-adapt and when they require human intervention to recover.

4.4.2.3.4 Effectiveness of ecosystem-based adaptation

While EbA has been able to reduce the impacts of sea level related
hazards, there is still fittle agreement on the size of the effect
(Gedan et al., 2011; Doswald et al, 2012; Lo, 2016; Renaud et al.,
2016). Dozens of independent field, experimental and numerical
studies have observed and measured the wave attenuation and
flood reduction benefits provided by natural habitats, such as marsh
and mangrove wetlands (Barbier and Enchelmeyer, 2014; Moller
et al, 2014; Rupprecht et al, 2017), coral reefs (Ferrario et al.,
2014; Storlazzi et al., 2017), oyster reefs (Scyphers et al, 2011) and
submerged seagrass beds (Infantes et al, 2012). Local and global
numerical studies indicate that marshes and mangroves can reduce
present-day surge-related flood damages by >15% annually, and the
loss of a metre of living coral reef can double annual wave-related
flood damages (Narayan et al., 2017; Beck et al., 2018). Artificial reef
restoration along tens of metres of coastline using Reef Ball™ and
other structures has been shown to reduce wave heights and stabilise
beach widths (Reguero et al., 2018a; Torres-Freyermuth et al., 2018).

Maintenance Costs

Thinning, clearing debris after storms, etc.: Mangrove:

5000 USD hat yr’ in Florida (Lewis, 2001) to 11,000 hat! yr"
{Aerts, 2018).

For mangroves globally, 7-85 USD ha yr" {Aerts et al, 201 8a);
For marshes in the Wadden Sea, 25 USD mt yr" (Vuik et al., 2019).

 

USD 9000 hat dian; Bayrakt t al., 2016);
Wetland Restoration {Marshes/ SE ee ee )

Mangroves, Maritime Forests)

Wetlands: 85,000-230,000 USD ha! {Aerts et al, 2018a); Mangroves:

2000-13,000 USD ha”! in American Samoa {Gilman and Ellison, 2007);
Salt Marshes: 67,000 USD ha! (Bayraktarov et al., 2016); Brushwood
dams for marsh restoration 150 m-! (Vuik et al, 2019).

Similar to maintenance costs for Wetland Conservation.

 

Reef Conservation (Coral/ Oyster)
{McCrea-Strub et al., 2011).

For example, start-up costs for Reef MPAs: 96-40,000 USD km-2

For MPAs, 12 million USD yr for the Great Barrier Reef (Balmford
et al., 2004).

 

Reef Restoration (Coral/ Oyster)

 

 

165,600 USD ha™ (median; Bayraktarov et al., 2016); Oyster Reefs:
66,800 USD ha“! (median; Bayraktarov et al., 2016); Artificial Reefs in
the UK 30,000-90,000 USD 100 mt {Aerts et al., 2018a).

Similar to maintenance costs for Reef Conservation.

 

 

 

391

 
 

Chapter 4

The effectiveness of EbA measures, however, varies considerably
depending on storm, wetland, reef and landscape parameters (Koch
et al., 2009; Loder et al, 2009; Wamsley et al., 2010; Pinsky et al,
2013; Quataert et al., 2015), which makes it difficult to extrapolate
the physical and economic benefits across geographies. Depending
on these parameters, rates of surge attenuation can vary between
5-70 cm km (Krauss et al., 2009; Vuik et al., 2015).

Critical gaps remain in our understanding about those parameters
that together affect the success of ecosystem-based measures
including choice of species and restoration techniques, lead time,
natural variability and residual risk, temperature, salinity, wave
energy and tidal range (Smith, 2006; Stiles Jr, 2006). Among reasons
commonly cited for the failure of mangrove restoration projects are
poor choice of mangrove species, planting in the wrong tidal zones
and in areas of excessive wave energy (Primavera and Esteban, 2008;
Bayraktarov et al., 2016; Kodikara et al., 2017).

The effectiveness of ecosystem-based measures also exhibits high
seasonal, annual and longer-term variability. For example, marsh
and seagrass wetlands typically have lower densities in winter which
reduces their coastal protection capacity (Méller and Spencer, 2002;
Paul and Amos, 2011; Schoutens et al., 2019). In the long-term, there
is limited evidence and low agreement on how changes in sea level,
sediment inputs, ocean temperature and ocean acidity will influence
the extent, distribution and health of marsh and mangrove wetlands,
coral reefs and oyster reefs (Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2007; Lovelock et al.,
2015; Crosby et al., 2016; Albert et al., 2017). EbA measures may have
differential lead times before they are effective. For example, newly
planted mangroves provide less wave attenuation until they mature
(~3-5 years; Mazda et al., 1997). In contrast, a reef restoration project
that uses submerged concrete structures performs as a breakwater as
soon as the sub-structure is in place (Reguero et al., 2018a).

4.4.2.3.5 Co-benefits and drawbacks
of ecosystem-based adaptation

There is high confidence that ecosystem-based measures provide
multiple co-benefits such as sequestering carbon (Siikamaki et al.,
2012; Hamilton and Friess, 2018), income from tourism (Carr and
Mendelsohn, 2003; Spalding et al., 2017), enhancing coastal fishery
productivity (Carrasquilla-Henao and Juanes, 2017; Taylor et al,
2018), improving water quality (Coen et al., 2007; Lamb et al., 2017),
providing raw material for food, medicine, fuel and construction
(Hussain and Badola, 2010; Uddin et al., 2013), and a range of
intangible and cultural benefits (Scyphers et al., 2015) that help
improve the resilience of communities vulnerable to sea level hazards
(Sutton-Grier et al., 2015).

In comparison to hard structures like seawalls, EbA measures,
particularly coastal wetlands, require more land (The Royal Society
Science Policy Centre, 2014), and competition for land is often why the
ecosystems have declined in the first place (4.4.2.3.1). On developed
coasts, this land is often not available. In such cases, hybrid measures
that either combine EbA measures with structural measures like
mangrove forests in front of dikes (Dasgupta et al. 2019), or build
ecological enhancements into engineered structures can provide an

392

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

effective solution. Like any other feature that interacts with coastal
processes, natural wetlands and reefs can increase flooding in some
instances, for example, due to the redistribution or acceleration of
flows in channels within a wetland system (Marsooli et al., 2016),
or an increase in infragravity wave (i.e., surface gravity waves with
frequencies lower than wind waves) energy behind a reef (Roeber
and Bricker, 2015).

4.4.2.3.6 Governance of ecosystem-based adaptation

The coastal protection benefits of natural ecosystems are increasingly
being recognised within international discourse and national coastal
adaptation, resilience and sustainable development plans and
strategies (Section 4.4.2.3.1). In general, obtaining permits for EbA
remains more difficult compared to established hard protection
measures, in places like the USA (Bilkovic, 2017). However, there are
examples of instruments specifically tailored to retain the protective
function of EbA (Borges et al., 2009; Government of India, 2018). The
Living Shorelines Regulations of the state government of Maryland
in the USA (Maryland DEP, 2013), for instance, requires that private
properties must include marsh creation or other non-structural
measures when stabilising their shorelines, unless a waiver is obtained.

There are an increasing number of public and private financial
mechanisms and policy instruments to encourage the use and
implementation of EbA measures (Colgan et al, 2017; Sutton-Grier
et al., 2018). For example, a regulation by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) of the USA, allows proponents of hazard
mitigation projects, such as state, territorial and local governments, to
take into account the co-benefits of EbA when assessing benefit-cost
ratios of FEMA-funded recovery projects (FEMA, 2015). International
guidelines are being developed for designing and implementing EbA
measures, with the intention to support wider implementation of
these responses (Hardaway Jr and Duhring, 2010; Van Slobbe et al.,
2013; Van Wesenbeeck et al., 2017; Bridges et al., 2018).

4.4.2.3.7 Economic efficiency of ecosystem-based adaptation

There is limited evidence regarding the economic efficiency of
EbA, mainly due to the fow agreement about EbA effectiveness
(Section 4.4.2.3.2) and costs (Section 4.4.2.3.2). A study of coastal
protection measures on the Gulf of Mexico coastline, USA, estimated
that EbA measures have average benefit-cost ratios above 3.5 for
2030 flood risk conditions, assuming a discount rate of 2% (Reguero
et al., 2018b; see Section 4.4.2.3.2). This study also finds that EbA are
nearly four times more cost-efficient along developed coastlines as
compared to conservation-priority areas because protection benefits
are higher in the former case due to the level of asset exposure.

4.4.2.4 Advance

4.4.2.4.1 Observed advance across geographies

Advance has a long history in most areas where there are dense
coastal populations and a shortage of land (very high confidence).

This includes land reclamation through polders around the southern
North Sea (Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium and England) and
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

China (Wang et al., 2014), which coincides with regions where
there is extensive hard protection in place (Section 4.4.2.4). Land
reclamation has also taken place in all major coastal cities to some
degree, even if only for the creation of port and harbour areas by
raising coastal flats above normal tidal levels through sediment
infill. On some steep coasts, where there is little flat land, such as the
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China, material from
elevated areas has been excavated to create fill material to build
land out into the sea.

Globally, it is estimated that about 33,700 km? of land has been
gained from the sea during the last 30 years (about 50% more than
has been lost), with the biggest gains being due to land reclamation
in places like Dubai, Singapore and China (Wang et al, 2014;
Donchyts et al., 2016). In Shanghai alone, 590 km? land has been
reclaimed during the same period (Sengupta et al., 2018). In Lagos,
25 km? of new land is currently being reclaimed (www.ekoatlantic.
com). Land reclamation is also popular in some small island settings.
The Maldives has recently increased the land area of their capital
region by constructing a new island called Hulhumalé, which has
been built 60 cm higher than the normal island elevation of 1.5 m, in
order to take into account future SLR (Hinkel et al., 2018).

4.4,2.4,2 Projected advance

Advance was not primarily a response to SLR in the past, but due to
a range of drivers, including land scarcity, population pressure and
extreme events, future advance measures are expected to become
more integrated with coastal adaptation and might even be seen
as an opportunity to support and fund adaptation in some cases
(Linham and Nicholls, 2010; RIBA and ICE, 2010; Nicholls, 2018).
While there is no literature on this topic, significant further advance
measures can be expected in land scarce situations, such as found in
China, Japan and Singapore, in coming decades.

4,4.2.4.3 Costs of advance

Contrary to protection measures, little systematic monetary
information is available about costs of advance measures, specifically
not in the peer reviewed literature. The costs of land reclamation are
extremely variable and depend on the unit cost of fill versus the
volumetric requirement to raise the land. Hence, filling shallow areas
is preferred on a cost basis.

4,4.2.4.4 Effectiveness of advance

Similar to hard protection, land reclamation is mature and effective
technology and can provide predictable levels of safety. If the entire
land area is raised above the height of ESLs, residual risks are lower
as compared to hard protection as there is no risk of catastrophic
defence failure.

4.42.45 Co-benetits and drawbacks of advance
The major co-benefit of advance is the creation of new land. The

major drawbacks include groundwater salinisation, enhanced
erosion and loss of coastal ecosystems and habitat, and the growth

Chapter 4

of the coastal floodplain (Li et al, 2014; Nadzir et al., 2014; Wang
et al, 2014; Chee et al., 2017). In China, for example, about 50% of
coastal ecosystems have been lost due to land reclamation, leading
to a range of impacts such as loss of biodiversity, decline of bird
species and fisheries resources, reduced water purification, and more
frequent harmful algal blooms (Wang et al., 2014). For example, the
reclamation of about 29,000 ha of land in Saemangeum, Republic of
Korea, in 2006, has led to a decrease in shorebird numbers by over
30% in two years, probably caused by mortality (Moores et al., 2016).
Inadvertently, historic land reclamation through polderisation may
have enhanced exposure and risk to coastal flooding by creating new
populated floodplains, but this has not been evaluated.

4,4.2.4.6 Governance of advance

Land reclamation raises equity issues with regards to access
and distribution of the new land created, specifically due to the
political economy associated with high coastal land values, and
the involvement of private capital and interests (Bisaro and Hinkel,
2018), but this has hardly been explored in the literature.

4.4.2.4.7 Economic efficiency of advance

There is fimited evidence on the efficiency of advance responses in
the scientific literature. Benefit-cost ratios of land reclamation can
be very high in urban areas due to high land and real estate prices
(Bisaro and Hinkel, 2018).

4.4.2.5. Accommodation

4.4.2.5.1 Observed accommodation across geographies

There is a high agreement that accommodation is a core element of
adaptation, and it is taking place on various scales based on measures
such as flood proofing and raising buildings, implementing drainage
systems, land use changes as well as EWS, emergency planning,
setback zones and insurance schemes. However, no literature is
available that summarises observed accommodation worldwide.
There is fow evidence of accommodation occurring directly as a
consequence of SLR but high evidence of accommodation measures
being implemented in response to coastal hazards such as coastal
flooding, salinisation and other sea-borne hazards such as cyclones.

Flood proofing may include the use of building designs and materials
which make structures less vulnerable to flood damages and/or
prevent floodwaters from entering structures. Examples include
floating houses in Asia, such as in Vietnam (Trang, 2016), raising
the floor of houses in the lower Niger delta (Musa et al., 2016),
construction of verandas with sandbags and shelves in houses to
elevate goods during floods in coastal communities in Cameroon
(Munji et al., 2013). In Semarang City, Indonesia, residents adapted
to coastal flooding by elevation of their houses by 50-400 cm or by
moving their goods to safer places, without making structural changes
(Buchori et al., 2018). Residents of Can Tho City of the Mekong Delta,
Vietnam elevated houses in response to tidal flooding (Garschagen,
2015). In urban areas extensive drainage systems contribute to
accommodation such as in Hong Kong and Singapore, which rely on

393

 
 

Chapter 4

urban drainage systems to handle large volumes of surface runoff
generated during storm events (Chan et al., 2018). Farming practices
have been adapted to frequent flooding in the lower Niger delta:
farmers raise crops above floodwaters by planting on mounds of soil
and apply ridging and terracing on farmlands to form barriers (Musa
et al., 2016). In the floodplains of Bangladesh, floating gardens help
to maintain food production even if the area is submerged (Irfanullah
et al., 2011). Here, the traditional way to build homesteads is on a
raised mound, built with earth from the excavation of canals and
ponds (ADPC, 2005). Coastal infrastructure, such as ports, having a
functional need to be at the coast, accommodate SLR with elevated
piers and critical infrastructure. One example is Los Angeles, where
PierS was raised to an elevation of 6 m (Aerts, 2018).

Communities in the Netherlands are experimenting with floating/
amphibious houses capable of adapting to different water levels,
and similar considerations are also discussed in other geographies,
such as in Bangkok (Nilubon et al, 2016). Flood proofing is widely
applied in the USA, where wet and dry flood proofing measures
are recognised: wet flood proofing reduces damage from flooding
while dry flood proofing makes a building watertight or substantially
impermeable to floodwaters up to the expected flood height (FEMA,
2014). In that sense, dry flood proofing could also be interpreted as a
protection measure on the level of individual structures.

Physical accommodation to salinisation and saline water intrusion
is more poorly documented. It mainly entails agricultural adaptation
to soil salinity, and saline surface and ground water, as described for
the land use changes aimed at alternating rice-shrimp systems and
shrimp aquaculture in the Mekong Delta (Renaud et al., 2015) or using
methods which decrease soil salinity, such as flushing rice fields with
fresh water to wash out salinity (Renaud et al., 2015), or applying
maize straw in wheat fields (Xie et al., 2017). Coastal communities
are also experimenting with the use of salt tolerant varieties as a
result of breeding programmes, for example, in Indonesia (Rumanti
et al., 2018), or saline irrigation water in conjunction with fresh
water, such as for maize in coastal Bangladesh (Murad et al., 2018).

Adaptation planning for SLR has been incorporated into land use
planning in several states in the USA (Butler et al., 2016b). In the
Yangtze River Delta, landscape planning designs floodplain zones to
accept floodwaters (Seavitt, 2013). In the Mekong Delta, different
land use options, including shifting from freshwater agriculture to
brackish and saline agriculture, were proposed as seawater intrudes
farther inland (Smajgl et al., 2015).

EWS are frequently incorporated into overall risk reduction strategies
and are applied for various coastal hazards such as tsunamis in coastal
areas of Indonesia (Lauterjung et al., 2017) and hydro-meteorological
coastal hazards in Bangladesh and Uruguay (Leal Filho et al., 2018).
They fall under ‘accommodation’ as they allow people to remain in
the hazard-prone area but provide advance warning or evacuation
in the face of imminent danger. In contrast to hard protection
measures, EWS have shorter installation time and lower impact on
the environment (Sattele et al, 2015). They can work effectively to
reduce risk arising from predictable hazardous events but are less

394

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

well-suited to accommodate slow onset change (i.e, events or
processes that happen with high certainty under different climate
change scenarios).

Climate risk insurance schemes have been recently developed to
address sudden, and in rare cases, slow onset hazards at the coast,
and to increase overall resilience. For coastal risks, insurance is
mainly applicable for sudden onset hazards, including storm surges
and coastal flooding, to buffer against the financial impacts of
loss events. For slow onset hazards, insurance schemes are not the
first-best tool, whereas resilience building and prevention of loss
and damage in such instances may be more cost-effective ways
to address these risks (Warner et al., 2013). In this context, index
based insurance products are increasingly offered, particularly in
low-income countries and have also been included in a number
of countries in their NDCs and in some cases in their National
Adaptation Plans (NAPs; Kreft et al., 2017). Countries with existing
climate risk insurance schemes include, for example, Haiti, Maldives,
Seychelles and Vietnam. The InsuResilience Global Partnership for
Climate and Disaster Risk Finance and Insurance Solutions was
launched at the 2017 UN Climate Conference (COP 23) in Bonn.
InsuResilience aims to enable more timely response after a disaster
and helps to better prepare for climate and disaster risk through
the use of climate and disaster risk finance and insurance solutions.
So far, climate risk insurance was used mainly in the context of
agriculture, where it has showed great efficacy in boosting
investments for increasing productivity (Fernandez and Schafer,
2018). However, on the global scale, the uptake of index insurance
is still low (Yuzva et al., 2018).

4.4.2.5.2 Projected accommodation

While there is no literature on projected accommodation, current
trends suggest further uptake of accommodation approaches in
coming decades, especially where protection approaches are not
economically viable. Flood proofing of houses and establishment
of new building codes to accommodate coastal hazards is also
expected to become more common in coming decades. Similarly,
accommodation measures for salinity are under further development,
such as rice breeding programs to improve salt tolerance (Linh et al.,
2012; Quan et al., 2018b). However, the achievements to improve
salinity tolerance in rice are rather modest so far (Hoang et al., 2016)
although efforts are expected to continue or even intensify. Given
that index based insurance products have been included in NDCs and
NAPs in a number of countries (Kreft et al., 2017), uptake is expected
to grow. Ports can continue elevating hazard-prone facilities and
the critical parts of port infrastructure can be protected by flood
walls. Alternatively, ports can use advance measures to develop port
facilities seaward (Aerts, 2018).

In summary, due to the large variety of different measures
implemented in ad hoc ways worldwide, there is fow confidence in
quantitative projections of accommodation measures in response to
SLR. However, there is high confidence that accommodation measures
will continue to be a widespread adaptation option especially in
combination with protection and retreat measures.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

4.4.2.5.3 Cost of accommodation

The cost of accommodation varies widely with the measures taken as
well as the expected flood height. For flood proofing of buildings in
New York City for instance, Aerts et al. (2014) provided an economic
rationale for the implementation of improved building codes, such as
elevating new buildings and protecting critical infrastructure (see also
Box 4.1). Flood proofing can also be undertaken by individuals and
even small, inexpensive flood proofing efforts can result in reductions
in flood damage (Zhu et al., 2010). In general, costs for flood proofing
increase as the flood protection elevation increases. Other costs
include those for maintenance and, if applicable, insurance premiums.
For example, deciding to elevate a building in the USA will increase
the project’s cost; however, the additional elevation may lead to
significant savings on flood insurance premiums (FEMA, 2014).

4,4.2.5.4 Effectiveness of accommodation

Accommodation measures can be very effective for current
conditions and small amounts of SLR, also buying time to prepare
for future SLR. Success stories include the case of Bangladesh
where improved early warnings, the construction of shelters, and
development of evacuation plans, helped to reduce fatalities as a
result of flooding and cyclones (Haque et al., 2012). Illiteracy, lack
of awareness and poor communication are, however, still hampering
the effectiveness of early warnings (Haque et al. 2012). If well
designed, and if the premiums reflect individual risks, insurance can
effectively discourage further investments in risky areas as insurance
cost provides information on the nature of locality-specific risks and
can incentivise investment in risk reduction by requiring that certain
minimum standards are met before granting insurance coverage
(Kunreuther, 2015). Limits to such accommodation occur much earlier
compared to protect, advance and retreat measures. While dikes
can be raised to 10 m, and retreat can be implemented to the 10 m
contour or higher, accommodating SLR has practical and economic
limits, and ultimately retreat or protection will be required.

4.4.2.5.5  Co-benetits and drawbacks of accommodation

The major co-benefit of accommodation is improved resilience of in
situ communities without retreat or the use of land and resources for
the construction of protection measures. Flood proofing, for example,
helps prevent demolition or relocation of structures and it is often
an affordable and cost effective approach to reducing flood risk
(Zhu et al, 2010). Specific accommodation measures have different
co-benefits such as that stilt houses not only protect from flooding
but also from wild animals (Biswas et al., 2015). Accommodation —
depending on the measure implemented — has the potential to
maintain landscape connectivity allowing access to the ocean as well
as landward migration of ecosystems, at least to some degree. It also
retains flood dynamics and with that the benefits of flooding such as
sediment re-distribution. Stilt houses leave space for the floodwater
while wet-flood proofing maintains a low hydrostatic pressure on the
buildings so that structures are less prone to failure during flooding
(FEMA, 2014).

Chapter 4

The major drawback of accommodation is that it actually does not
prevent flooding or salinisation, which might have consequences not
addressed by the accommodation measure itself. Examples include
inundation of an area where houses are flood proofed but schooling
of children and business operations are nevertheless disrupted.
Significant clean up may also be needed after flood water enters
buildings, including the removal of sediment, debris or chemical
residues (FEMA, 2014). Also, flood proofing measures require the
current risk of flooding to be known and communicated to and
understood by the public through flood hazard mapping studies and
flood warning information (Zhu et al., 2010). Small businesses in
particular may face difficulties to recover from flooding due to lack of
forward planning (Hoggart et al., 2014).

Co-benefits of insurance include the possibility that sovereign level
insurance may improve the credit ratings of vulnerable countries,
reducing the cost of capital and allowing them to borrow to invest in
resilient infrastructure (Buhr et al., 2018). Major natural disasters can
weaken sovereign ratings, especially if there is no insurance in place
(Moritz Kramer, 2015). One much discussed drawback of insurance is
the moral hazard that may result: since someone else bears the costs
of a loss, those insured may be less inclined to take precautionary
measures or may act recklessly (Duus-Otterstrém and Jagers, 2011).

4.4.2.5.6 Governance of accommodation

While accommodation measures to coastal hazards are often taking
place at the local level, and are decided by individual homeowners,
farmers or communities, from a governance perspective it is important
to provide guidance on how and to what extent owners can retrofit
their homes to reduce the risk to coastal flooding. In New York City,
for instance, changes to building codes, require elevating, or flood
proofing of existing and new buildings in the 100-year floodplain,
and prevent construction of critical infrastructure like hospitals in the
flood zone (NYC, 2014; see also Box 4.1).

Effective coastal risk management efforts rely on good governance
that includes understanding the probability and consequences of
hazard impacts like flooding and salinisation, and implementing
mechanisms to prevent or manage all possible events (EEA, 2013).
The effectiveness of accommodation measures based on institutional
measures, such as EWS and evacuation plans, largely depends on the
governance capabilities they are embedded in.

4.4.2.5.7 Economic-efficiency of accommodation

There is high confidence that many accommodation measures are
very cost-efficient. Flood EWS coupled with precautionary measures
have been shown to produce significant economic benefits (Parker,
2017). Elevating areas at high risk and retrofitting buildings in Ho Chi
Minh City, for example, have benefit-cost ratios of 15 under SLR of
180 cm and a discount rate of 5% during the 21st century (Scussolini
et al., 2017). In the context of the National Flood Insurance Program
in the USA, it has been estimated that elevating new houses by
60 cm might raise mortgage payments by 240 USD yr, but reduce
flood insurance by 1000-2000 USD yr depending on the flood
zone (FEMA, 2018), although this only addresses present extremes

395

 
 

Chapter 4

and ignores future SLR (Zhu et al., 2010). In Europe, the benefits of
installing a cross-border continental-scale flood EWS are estimated
at 400 EUR per EUR invested (Pappenberger et al., 2015).

4.4.2.6 Retreat

4.4.2.6.1 Observed retreat across geographies

There is limited evidence of migration occurring directly as a
consequence of impacts associated with environmental change
generally and SLR specifically. Research examining the linkages
between migration and environmental change has been conducted
in the Pacific (Connell, 2012; Janif et al, 2016; Perumal, 2018), South
Asia (Szabo et al., 2016; Call et al, 2017; Stojanov et al., 2017), Latin
America (Nawrotzki and DeWaard, 2016; Nawrotzki et al., 2017),
Alaska, in North America (Marino and Lazrus, 2015; Hamilton et al.,
2016) and Africa (Gray and Wise, 2016). While some limited evidence
was found on population movement inland associated with shoreline
encroachment in Louisiana, USA (Hauer et al., 2018), this research
emphasises that the relationship between climate change impacts
including SLR and migration is more nuanced than suggested by
simplified cause-and-effect models (Adger et al., 2015). Migration
is driven by a large number of individual, social, economic, political,
demographic and environmental push and pull factors (Black et al.,
2011; Koubi et al., 2016), interwoven with mega-trends such as
urbanisation, land use change and globalisation, and is influenced by
development and political practices and discourses (Bettini and Gioli,
2016; Cross-Chapter Box 7). For example, asset endowed individuals
and households are more able to migrate out from flood-prone
areas (Milan and Ruano, 2014; Logan et al., 2016), while the poorest
households are significantly susceptible to material and human losses
following an extreme event or disruptive environmental change
(Call et al., 2017). Individual and social drivers include perceptions
of environmental change (Koubi et al., 2016), formed by both direct
experience of change and indirect information from social networks,
mass media and governmental agencies. Environmental factors
include the longer term impacts of climate variability and change,
which can erode the capacity of ecosystems to provide essential
services such as availability of freshwater, soil fertility and energy
production acting as a threat multiplier for other drivers of migration
(Hunter et al., 2015; McLeman, 2018).

There is robust evidence of disasters displacing people worldwide,
but fimited evidence that climate change or SLR is the direct cause.
In 2017, 18.8 million people were displaced by disasters, of which
18 million were displaced by weather-related events including
8.6 million people displaced by floods and 7.5 million by storms,
with hundreds of millions more at risk (IDMC, 2017; Islam and Khan,
2018). The majority of resultant population movements tend to occur
within the borders of affected countries (Warner and Afifi, 2014;
Hunter et al., 2015; Nawrotzki et al., 2017).

We find robust evidence of planned relocation taking place worldwide
in low-lying zones exposed to the impacts of coastal hazards (Hino
et al., 2017; Mortreux et al., 2018). While relocation plans are usually
discussed after an extreme event occurs, they generally target the
reduction of long-term environmental risks, including those of

396

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

SLR (McAdam and Ferris, 2015; Hino et al, 2017; Morrison, 2017).
For example, in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina, the Louisiana
Comprehensive Master Plan for a Sustainable Coast recommended
the relocation of several communities in the next 50 years due to
expected RSL rise, and relocation of inhabitants from Isle de Jean
Charles is already taking place (Barbier, 2015; Coastal Protection
and Restoration Authority of Louisiana, 2017). In Shismaref, an
Ifupiat community in Alaska, increased shoreline erosion triggered
government-led relocation (Bronen and Chapin, 2013; Maldonado
et al., 2013). In the Pacific, current coastal risks aggravated by rising sea
level are driving the government led relocation of the inhabitants of
Taro, the provincial capital of Choiseul Province in the Solomon Islands
(Albert et al, 2018). In 2014, the government of Kiribati purchased
land on Vanua Levu, the second largest island of Fiji, with the purpose
of economic development and food security, but many i-Kiribati
associated the acquisition with future relocation to Fiji (Hermann and
Kempf, 2017). In southeast Asia, the government of Vietnam assists
and manages rural populations’ relocation from disaster prone areas
exposed to coastal risks in the Mekong Delta to large industrial
areas with high labour demand, such as Ho Chi Minh City and Can
Tho City (Collins et al., 2017). Managed realignment carried out for
the purposes of habitat creation, improved flood risk management
and more affordable coastal protection, is increasingly popular in
Europe, but usually involves small-scale projects and few people if any
(Esteves, 2013). Most of the managed realignment projects in the UK
and Germany have been carried out for habitat creation and to reduce
spending on coastal defences (Hino et al., 2017).

4.4.2.6.2 Projected retreat

There is high agreement that climate change has the potential to
drastically alter the size and direction of migration flows (Connell,
2012; Gray and Wise, 2016; Janif et al., 2016; Nawrotzki and DeWaard,
2016; Szabo et al., 2016; Call et al., 2017; Nawrotzki et al., 2017), but
there is /ow confidence in quantitative projections of migration in
response to SLR and extremes of sea level. The number of modelling
studies of migration in response to environmental drivers has
increased rapidly over the past decade (Kumari et al. 2018), but only
a small portion of these model studies address migration in response
to SLR and sea level extremes. Amongst these, a variety of different
modelling approaches have been applied, but no model currently
accounts for all push and pull factors influencing migration decisions
(see Section 4.4.2.6.1).

A model projecting future US county-level populations exposed
to permanent inundation was combined with an empirical model
of potential migration destinations to produce the first sea level/
migration analysis of migrant destinations (Hauer, 2017). Assuming
that households with incomes above 100,000 USD yr’ would have
resources to stay and adapt, it was found that 1.8 m SLR by 2100
would displace over two million people in south Florida. Projected
population gains due to SLR reach several hundred thousand for
some inland urban areas. A gravity model modified to account for
both distance to destinations and their attractiveness (deriving from
such factors as economic opportunity and environmental amenities)
projects a net migration into and out of the East African coastal
Zone, ranging from out-migration of 750,000 people between 2020
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

and 2050 to a small in-migration (Kumari et al., 2018). However,
this range includes migration stimulated by freshwater availability
as well as SLR and episodic flooding. A generalised radiation or
diffusion model predicts 0.9 million people will migrate due to SLR
in Bangladesh by 2050 and 2.1 million by 2100, largely internally,
with substantial implications for nutrition, shelter and employment
in destination areas (Davis et al., 2018).

A global dynamic general equilibrium framework (Desmet et al., 2018)
provides a more comprehensive approach to accounting for economic
factors including changes to trade, innovation, and agglomeration,
and political factors, such as policy barriers to mobility, all of
which influence the migration response to environmental change.
Agent-based models attempt to simulate decisions by individuals who
face a variety of socioeconomic and environmental changes (Kniveton
et al., 2012). However, neither general equilibrium nor agent-based
frameworks have been applied yet to migration responses to SLR.
Econometric models, common in climate/migration studies (Millock,
2015), likewise have yet to be applied to the SLR context, except for a
single case study where an econometric model was used to interpret
the outcome of a discrete choice experiment (Buchanan et al., 2019).
For example, an interesting distinction between migration responses
to long term temperature and precipitation trends in contrast to
extreme events like flooding has been noted (Bohra-Mishra et al.,
2014; Mueller et al., 2014), but similar econometric studies have yet
to be done comparing responses to gradual land loss versus flooding
during ESL events.

4,4.2.6.3 Cost of retreat

We have limited evidence of estimates on the cost of retreat. There
are few cost estimates in the literature and these are based on
stylised assumptions as little empirical data is available.

The cost of managed relocation, including land acquisition, building of
roads and infrastructure and other subsidies, was found to vary from
10,000-270,000 GBP per home in United Kingdom Coastal Change
Pathfinder projects (Regeneris Consulting, 2011), and between
10,000 USD in Fiji and 100,000 USD per person in Alaska and in the Isle
of Jean Charles in the USA (Hino et al., 2017). For people involved in
planned relocation in Shaanxi Province, Northwest China, households
receive subsidies ranging from 1200-5100 USD (Lei et al., 2017).
The Louisiana's National Disaster Resilience Competition, Phase ||
Application states that the proposed relocation of 40 households in the
Isle de Jean Charles in Louisiana is estimated to cost 48,379,249 USD,
including the cost for land acquisition, infrastructure and construction
of new dwellings (State of Louisiana, 2015). Generally, maintenance
costs do not arise if people are moved completely out of the hazard
zone (Suppasri et al., 2015; Hino et al., 2017). In cases in which people
are only moved so that short-term but not long-term risk is reduced,
follow up costs for further responses will occur.

The individual costs associated with displacement after an
environmental disaster are difficult to obtain. In the literature, there
are limited estimates of the social costs to residents of Guadeloupe,
Saint Croix, St. Thomas, Puerto Rico, and the southeast USA displaced
after Hurricanes Hugo (1989) and Katrina (2005). A survey conducted

Chapter 4

across 18 parishes (ie. counties) in Louisiana in 2006 revealed
that non-displaced households had an average income of 36,000
USD compared to an average income of 30,000 USD recorded for
displaced households (Hori and Schafer, 2010).

4,4.2.6.4 Effectiveness of retreat

There is very high confidence that retreat is effective in reducing
the risks and impacts of SLR as retreat directly reduces exposure of
human settlements and activities (Gioli et al, 2016; Shayegh et al.,
2016; Hauer, 2017; Morrison, 2017).

4.4.2.6.5  Co-benefits and drawbacks of retreat

The other outcomes of retreat responses, beyond the one of
effectively reducing SLR risks and impacts, are complex and affect
both origin and destination. Generally, retreat impacts social
networks, access to services and economic and social opportunities,
and several well-being indicators (Jones and Clark, 2014; Adams,
2016; Herath et al., 2017; Kura et al., 2017; McNamara et al.,
2018). The socioeconomic benefits of migration to individuals and
households may include improved access to health and education
services, as well as labour markets (Wrathall and Suckall, 2016).
Destination areas may gain economically as populations and
capital relocate and provide a new source of labour, capital and
innovation to inland areas (see Section 4.4.2.6.2; de Haas, 2010).
Income inequality may be reduced, but only through migration to
areas with growing economies. Remittances can provide flexibility
in livelihood options, supply capital for investment and spread risk
(Scheffran et al., 2012).

Drawbacks of migration and displacement at the destination can
be increased competition for resources and within labour markets,
pressure on frontline services and on social cohesion as a result of
heightened cultural or ethnic tension (Werz and Hoffman, 2015), as
well as cultural, social and psychological losses related to disruptions
to sense of place and identity, self-efficacy, and rights to ancestral
land and culture (McNamara et al., 2018). The unplanned and
unassisted voluntary relocation of the inhabitants of Nuatambu and
Nusa Hope in the Solomon Islands to areas further from the coast
poses a series of practical challenges with sanitation, access to
drinking water and transport (Albert et al., 2018).

The success of planned relocation in terms of the balance of
co-benefits and drawbacks varies across relocation schemes (Hino
et al, 2017) and outcomes are highly uneven (Genovese and
Przyluski, 2013; Ford et al., 2015; Nordstrom et al., 2015; Bukvic
and Owen, 2017; Hino et al., 2017; Jamero et al., 2017). On the one
hand, well designed and carefully implemented programmes, such
as the ongoing resettlement of indigenous communities in Alaska,
can improve housing standards and reduce vulnerability (Suppasri
et al., 2015; Albert et al, 2018). On the other hand, relocated
communities have often become further impoverished (Wilmsen and
Webber, 2015), because they are removed from cultural and material
resources on which they rely, compounded by poor implementation
processes that may fail to ensure fairness, social and environmental

397

 
 

Chapter 4

justice and well-being (Herath et al., 2017; Mortreux et al., 2018;
Nygren and Wayessa, 2018).

4,4.2.6.6 Governance of retreat

Environmentally driven migration and displacement gained major
attention over the last decade in the international policy community
(Goodwin-Gill and McAdam, 2017). Worldwide programmes, such
as the Nansen Initiative, signed by 110 countries to address the
serious legal gap around the protection of cross-border migrants
impacted by natural disasters, have been implemented (Gemenne
and Brticker, 2015). In 2016, the Platform on Disaster Displacement
was established to follow up on the work conducted by the Nansen
Initiative with the objective of implementing the recommendations
of the Protection Agenda (McAdam and Ferris, 2015). Governments
are further encouraged by civil society to relocate people at risk and
displaced populations out of disaster-prone areas to avoid potential
casualties (Lei et al, 2017; Mortreux et al., 2018). There have been
discussions among Pacific Island countries and territories and other
nations in the Pacific Rim around new policy mechanisms that would
facilitate adaptive migration in the region in response to natural
hazards including SLR (Burson and Bedford, 2015). There have been
cases presented at the Immigration and Protection Tribunal of New
Zealand testing refugee claims associated with climate change from
Tuvaluan and i-Kiribati applicants, both citing environmental change
on their home islands as grounds for remaining in New Zealand.
One applicant was successful in the quest to remain in New Zealand
on humanitarian grounds, but not on the grounds of refugee status
(Farbotko et al., 2016).

The is high agreement that outcomes can be improved by upholding
the principle of procedural justice and respecting the autonomy of
individuals and their decisions about where and how they live (Warner
et al., 2013; Schade et al., 2015; McNamara et al., 2018). However,
there are cases where logistical and political stances constrain the
application of such approach, such as when the government of Sri
Lanka prohibited rebuilding along the coastline of the country after
the 2004 tsunami (Hino et al, 2017). Proactive planning, including
participation and consultation with those in peril, has the potential
to improve outcomes (medium confidence; de Sherbinin et al., 2011;
Gemenne and Blocher, 2017). Governments can assist migrants
through policy reforms to enable relocation to fast growing economic
regions in the country. An example of this approach was adopted in
Vietnam by both the National Target Program to Respond to Climate
Change and the National Strategy for Natural Disaster Prevention,
Response and Mitigation targeted at locations within the Mekong
Delta exposed to the impacts of SLR (Nguyen et al., 2015; Collins
et al, 2017). Outcomes of retreat for both community of origin and
destination can also be improved by building the human capital of
migrants (skills, health and education), reducing costs of migration
and remittance transfer, and provision of improved safety nets for
migrants at their destinations (high agreement) (Gemenne and
Blocher, 2017).

398

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

4.4.2.6.7 Economic efficiency of retreat

There is limited evidence on the efficiency of retreat responses in the
scientific literature.

4.4.3 Governance Challenges in Responding
to Sea Level Rise
4.4.3.1 Introduction

Governance is pivotal to shaping SLR responses. The assessment of
SLR responses above has shown that each type of response raises
specific governance challenges associated with the distribution
of costs, benefits and negative consequences of responses across
societal actors. Hence, SLR responses require governance efforts if
social conflicts are to be resolved and mutual opportunities amongst
all actors realised. Generally, responses involve the interaction of
diverse public and private actors at different levels of decision making
with divergent values, interests and goals on coastal activities,
lifestyles, livelihoods, risks, resilience and sustainability (high
confidence; Dovers and Hezri, 2010; Foerster et al., 2015; Giddens,
2015; Mills et al, 2016; DolSak and Prakash, 2018; Hinkel et al.,
2018; Hoegh-Guldberg et al., 2018; AR5). This leads to a number of
overarching governance challenges that arise from the nature of SLR,
which will be assessed in this section.

While there is a substantial literature on coastal governance, little
attention has been focused explicitly on SLR governance, as was
also the case in AR5 (Wong et al., 2014). Furthermore, much of the
adaptation governance literature has focused on putting forward
normative prescriptions on how governance arrangements ought
to be (eg., transformative governance; Chaffin et al., 2016), but
with limited empirical evidence on the actual effectiveness of these
prescriptions (Klostermann et al, 2018; Runhaar et al., 2018). Hence,
understanding the social mechanisms leading to the emergence
of particular governance arrangements, and how effective they
are in addressing climate change and SLR, is limited (Wong et al.,
2014; Bisaro and Hinkel, 2016; Oberlack, 2017; Bisaro et al., 2018;
Roggero et al., 2018a; Roggero et al., 2018b). An important post-AR5
development has thus been to move beyond descriptions and
normative prescriptions about ‘good governance’ to explore which
factors help (called enablers) or hinder (called barriers) how social
choices are made and implemented on complex issues like climate
change and SLR, as elaborated in the next subsection.

4.4.3.2 Understanding Barriers to Adaptation
as Governance Challenges

AR5 stated that there are many reasons why adaptation governance
is complex (Klein et al, 2014). The first generation of studies that
investigated this question empirically identified many (lists of)
barriers that people have experienced in adaptation governance
in specific case contexts, including political, institutional,
social-cognitive, economic, financial, biophysical and technical
barriers (Klein et al., 2014). Although insightful for these specific
cases, including SLR (Hinkel et al., 2018), accumulation of empirical
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

findings in building theory proved to be limited, and it did not result
in more evidence-informed advice to policy makers on how to deal
with barriers (Biesbroek et al., 2013; Eisenack et al., 2014).

In response, in a second generation of studies, several frameworks
have been proposed and tested to advance scholarship on barriers
to adaptation (Eisenack and Stecker, 2012; Barnett et al., 2015;
Lehmann et al., 2015; Bisaro and Hinkel, 2016). A frequently used
framework was developed by Moser and Ekstrom (2010) who
identified and linked key barriers to certain stages of the policy
process: understanding, planning and management stages. Moser
and Ekstrom (2010) argue that conditions, such as the scope and
scale of adaptation, have significant implications for which barriers
are activated in the policy process, and how persistent and difficult
they are to overcome. This and other frameworks have been applied
in a diversity of contexts, providing valuable insights about the
governance challenges involved in adapting to climate change and
suggestions for improvement (Ekstrom and Moser, 2014; Rosendo
et al., 2018; Thaler et al., 2019).

A recent generation of studies takes more theory based approaches
and includes contextual factors to analyse the key social mechanisms
that explain why adaptation processes are often complex, result in
deadlocks, delays or even failure (Biesbroek et al., 2014; Eisenack
et al., 2014; Wellstead et al, 2014; Biesbroek et al., 2015; Bisaro
and Hinkel, 2016; Oberlack and Eisenack, 2018; Sieber et al., 2018;
Wellstead et al.). Such insights are critical as they can be used by
practitioners for policy design (e.g., to prevent certain deadlocks
from emerging by (re)designing contextual conditions), or provide
insights on strategic interventions in ongoing processes to revitalise
deadlocked adaptation governance (Biesbroek et al., 2017).

4.4.3.3. Governance Challenges in the Face of Sea Level Rise
There is a wide diversity of governance challenges and opportunities
for tackling SLR, with marked differences within and between coastal
communities in developed and developing counties. Five salient
overarching governance challenges that arise due to distinctive
features of SLR were highlighted. This typology is then used to assess
how planning, participation and conflict resolution (Section 4.4.4.2),
decision analysis methods (Section 4.4.4.3), and enabling conditions
(Section 4.5) can help to address these five challenges.

Time horizon and uncertainty: The long-term commitment to
SLR (Section 4.2.3.5) and the large and deep uncertainty about
the magnitude and timing of SLR beyond 2050 (Section 4.4.4.3.2),
challenge standard planning and decision making practises for
several reasons (high confidence; Peters et al., 2017; Pot et al., 2018;
Hall et al., 2019; Hinkel et al., 2019). The time horizon of SLR extends
beyond usual political, electoral and budget cycles. Furthermore,
many planning and decision making practices strive for predictability
and certainty, which is at odds with the dynamic risk and deep
uncertainty characterising SLR (Hall et al., 2019). Tensions can arise
between established risk-based planning that seeks to measure risk,
and adaptation responses that embrace uncertainty and complexity
(Kuklicke and Demeritt, 2016; Carlsson Kanyama et al., 2019). For
example, tensions arise because of the mismatch between the

Chapter 4

relative inflexibility of existing law and institutions and the evolving
nature of SLR risk and impacts (Cosens et al, 2017; Craig et al.,
2017; DeCaro et al., 2017). Possible limits of in situ responses to
ongoing SLR (eg., protection and accommodation), bring into
question prevailing legal approaches to property rights and land use
regulation (Byrne, 2012). In addition, because uncertainty about SLR
makes it difficult to decide when to wait and when to act, public
actors fear being held accountable for misjudgments (Kuklicke and
Demeritt, 2016). The long time horizon and uncertainty of SLR make it
difficult to mobilise political will and the leadership required to take
visionary action (Cuevas et al., 2016; Gibbs, 2016; Yusuf et al., 2016;
Yusuf et al., 2018b).

Cross-scale and cross-domain coordination: SLR creates new
coordination problems across jurisdictional levels and domains,
because impacts cut across scales, sectors and policy domains and
responding often exceeds the capacities of local governments and
communities (medium confidence; Araos et al., 2017; Termeer et al.,
2017; Pinto et al., 2018; Clar, 2019; Clar and Steurer, 2019; Sections
4.3.2 and 4.4.2). Local responses are generally nested within a
hierarchy of local, regional, national and international governance
arrangements and cut across sectors (Cuevas, 2018; Chhetri
et al., 2019; Clar, 2019). Furthermore responding to SLR is only one
administrative priority amongst many, and the choice of SLR response
is influenced by multiple co-existing functional responsibilities
and perspectives (¢.g., planning, emergency management, asset
management and community development) that compete for
legitimacy, further complicating the coordination challenge (Klein
et al., 2016; Vij et al, 2017; Jones et al., 2019).

Equity and social vulnerability: SLR and responses may affect
communities and society in ways that are not evenly distributed,
which can compound vulnerability and inequity, and undermine
societal aspirations, such as achieving SDGs (high confidence;
Section 4.3.3.2; Eriksen et al., 2015; Foerster et al., 2015; Sovacool
et al., 2015; Clark et al., 2016; Gorddard et al, 2016; Adger et al.,
2017; Holland, 2017; DolSak and Prakash, 2018; Lidstrom, 2018;
Matin et al., 2018; Paprocki and Huq, 2018; Sovacool, 2018; Warner
et al., 2018a). Costs and benefits of action and inaction are distributed
unevenly, with some coastal nations, particularly small island states,
being confronted with adaptation costs amounting to several percent
of GDP in the 21st century (Section 4.3.3.2). Land use planning for
climate adaptation can exacerbate sociospatial inequalities at the
local level, as illustrated in a study of eight cities, namely Boston
(USA), New Orleans (USA), Medellin (Colombia), Santiago (Chile),
Metro Manila (Philippines), Jakarta (Indonesia), Surat (India), and
Dhaka (Bangladesh; Anguelovski et al., 2016). Private responses may
also exacerbate inequalities as, for example, in Miami, USA, where
purchase of homes in areas at higher elevation has increased property
prices displacing poorer communities from these areas (Keenan et al.,
2018). In Bangladesh, some adaptation practices have enabled land
capture by elites, public servants, the military and roving gangs,
and resulted in various forms of marginalisation that compound
vulnerability and risk (Sovacool, 2018); a reality also faced by many
other coastal communities around the world (Sovacool et al., 2015).

399

 
 

Chapter 4

Social conflict: Ongoing SLR could become a catalyst for possibly
intractable social conflict by impacting human activities, infrastructure
and development along low-lying shorelines (high confidence). Social
conflict refers here to the non-violent struggle between groups,
organisations and communities over values, interests, resources,
and influence or power, whereby parties seek to achieve their own
goals, and may seek to prevent others from realising their goals and
possibly harm rivals (Coser, 1967; Oberschall, 1978; Pruitt et al., 2003).
SLR impacts that could contribute to conflict include: disruptions to
critical infrastructure, cultural ties to the coast, livelihoods, coastal
economies, public health, well-being, security, identity and the
sovereignty of some low-lying island nations (Sections 4.3.2.4,
4.3.3.2, 4.3.3.6; Mills et al, 2016; Yusuf et al., 2016; Nursey-Bray,
2017; Hinkel et al., 2018). SLR responses inevitably raise difficult
trade-offs between private and public interests, short- and long-term
concerns, and security and conservation goals, which are difficult to
reconcile due to divergent problem framing, interests, values and
ethical positions (Eriksen et al., 2015; Foerster et al., 2015; Mills et al,
2016; Termeer et al., 2017; Sovacool, 2018). To some countries, SLR
presents a security risk due to the scale of potential displacement
and migration of people (Section 4.4.2.6). Climate change, and rising
seas in particular, could compound sociopolitical stressors (Sovacool
et al., 2015), challenge the efficacy of prevailing legal processes
(Byrne, 2012; Busch, 2018; Setzer and Vanhala, 2019), and spark or
escalate conflict (Lusthaus, 2010; Nursey-Bray, 2017).

Complexity: SLR introduces novel and complex problems that are
difficult to understand and address (high confidence; Moser et al.,
2012; Alford and Head, 2017; Wright and Nichols, 2018; Hall et al,
2019).As a result of the preceding features of the SLR problem, and the
complexity of the nonlinear interactions between biogeophysical and
human systems, SLR challenges may be difficult to frame, understand
and respond to. Often, disciplinary science is not sufficient for
understanding complex problems like SLR and traditional technical
problem solving may not be well suited for crafting enduring SLR
responses (Lawrence et al., 2015; Termeer et al., 2015). SLR poses a
challenge for bridging gaps between science, policy and practice (Hall
et al., 2019). The complexity and rapid pace of SLR in some localities
is also challenging traditional community decision making practices,
for example, in some Pacific Island communities (Nunn et al., 2014).

4.4.4 Planning, Engagement and Decision Tools
for Choosing Responses
4.4.4.1 — Introduction

A range of established and emerging planning, public participation
and conflict resolution practices can help in making social choices
and addressing governance challenges in responding to SLR
(Section 4.4.4.2). Social choice and decision making processes may
also involve the application of formal decision analysis methods for
appraising and choosing responses (Section 4.4.4.3). Making social
choices involves deciding which combination of decision methods,
modes of participation, conflict resolution strategies, and planning
processes to use when and how, and then implementing the resultant
decisions, monitoring and reviewing progress over time, and making

400

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

appropriate adjustments in the light of experience, change and
emerging knowledge and needs. The legal literature on roles played
by law (Byrne, 2012; Vidas, 2014; Reiblich et al., 2019; Setzer and
Vanhala, 2019), or informal approaches such as indigenous decision
making practices (Carter, 2018) were not assessed.

4.4.4.2 Planning, Public Participation and Conflict Resolution
in the Face of SLR

Land use or spatial planning has the potential to help communities
prepare for the future and decide how to manage coastal activities
and land use taking into account the uncertainty, complexity and
contestation that characterise SLR (high confidence; Hurlimann and
March, 2012; Hurlimann et al., 2014; Berke and Stevens, 2016; King
et al., 2016; Reiblich et al., 2017) Planners work with governing
authorities, the private sector, and local communities to integrate and
apply tailor-made decision analysis, public participation and conflict
resolution approaches that can be institutionalised in statutory
provisions, and aligned with informal institutional structures and
processes carried out at various scales (Hurlimann and March, 2012;
Smith and Glavovic, 2014; Berke and Stevens, 2016).

Planning can play an important role in crafting SLR responses,
addressing several of the governance challenges identified above
(Section 4.4.3). Planning is future focused and can assist communities
to develop and pursue a shared vision, and understand and address
SLR concerns in locality-specific ways (Hurlimann and March, 2012;
Berke and Stevens, 2016). Planning can help articulate and clarify
roles and responsibilities through statutory planning provisions,
complemented by non-statutory processes (Vella et al., 2016). It can
build social and administrative networks that mobilise cross-scale
SLR responses, and facilitate integration of diverse mitigation and
adaptation goals alongside other public aspirations and policy
imperatives (Hurlimann and March, 2012; Vella et al., 2016). Planning
can also facilitate the establishment of collaborative regional forums
that cross jurisdictional boundaries and assist local governments
and other stakeholders to pool resources and coordinate roles
and responsibilities across multiple governance levels, such as the
Southeast Florida Regional Climate Change Compact, USA (Shi
et al., 2015; Vella et al., 2016). Regulatory planning can be used by
governing authorities to steer future infrastructure, housing, industry
and related development away from areas exposed to SLR (Hurlimann
and March, 2012; Hurlimann et al., 2014; Smith and Glavovic, 2014;
Berke and Stevens, 2016).

The extent to which planning is effective in reducing coastal risk,
however, varies widely between and within coastal nations (Glavovic
and Smith, 2014; Shi et al., 2015; Cuevas et al., 2016; King et al., 2016;
Woodruff and Stults, 2016). Planning can fail to prevent development
in at-risk locations, and may even accelerate such development, as
experienced in settings as diverse as Java, Indonesia (Suroso and
Firman, 2018), the Philippines (Cuevas, 2018), Australia (Hurlimann
et al., 2014), and the USA (Vella et al., 2016; Woodruff and Stults,
2016). Planning has exacerbated sociospatial inequalities in cities
like Boston, USA, Santiago, Chile, and Jakarta, Indonesia (Anguelovski
et al., 2016). A study of vulnerability dynamics in Houston, New
Orleans and Tampa, USA shows that vulnerability can be reinforced
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

or ameliorated through adaptation planning and decision making
processes (Kashem et al., 2016). Regulatory planning may be
non-existent in some settings, such as informal settlements, or
when used can paradoxically entrench vulnerability and compound
risk (Berquist et al., 2015; Amoako, 2016; Ziervogel et al., 2016b).
Planning practice is thus both a contributor to and an outcome of
local politics and power. Recognising and navigating these challenges
is key to realising the promise of planning for reducing SLR risk, and
participatory planning processes that reconcile divergent interests
are central to this endeavour (Forester, 2006; Smith and Glavovic,
2014; Anguelovski et al, 2016; Cuevas et al., 2016).

Public participation refers to directly involving citizens in decision
making processes rather than only indirectly via voting. Citizen
participation is commonplace in public decision making that
addresses important societal concerns like SLR (Sarzynski, 2015;
Berke and Stevens, 2016; Gorddard et al, 2016; Baker and Chapin
II, 2018; Yusuf et al., 2018b). Practices sit along a continuum from
manipulation to minimal involvement and more empowering and
self-determining practices (Arnstein, 1969; International Association
for Public Participation, 2018). Public participation draws on a wide
variety of tailored engagement processes and practices, from ‘serious
games’ (Wu and Lee, 2015) to role-play simulations (Rumore et al.,
2016), and deliberative-analytical engagement (Webler et al., 2016).

There has been a proliferation of public engagement approaches
and practices applied to adaptation in recent decades (Webler
et al, 2016; Kirshen et al. 2018; Mehring et al., 2018; Nkoana
et al, 2018; Yusuf et al., 2018a; Uittenbroek et al, 2019). Increasing
citizen participation in adaptation and other public decision making
processes shifts the role of government from a chiefly steering
and regulating role towards more responsive and enabling roles,
sometimes referred to as co-design, co-production, and co-delivery
of adaptation responses (Ziervogel et al., 2016a; Mees et al., 2019).
Engagement strategies grounded in community deliberation can
help to improve understanding about SLR and response options,
reducing the polarising effect of alternative political allegiances and
worldviews (Akerlof et al., 2016; Uittenbroek et al., 2019). Public
participation has also the potential to successfully include vulnerable
groups in multi-level adaptation processes (Kirshen et al., 2018),
promote justice and enable transformative change (Broto et al.,
2015; Schlosberg et al., 2017).

It is widely recognised that authentic and meaningful public
participation is important and can help in crafting effective and
enduring adaptation responses, but is invariably difficult to achieve
in practice (Barton et al., 2015; Cloutier et al., 2015; Sarzynski, 2015;
Serrao-Neumann et al., 2015; Berke and Stevens, 2016; Chu et al.,
2016; Schlosberg et al., 2017; Baker and Chapin III, 2018; Kirshen et al.,
2018; Lawrence et al. 2018; Mehring et al., 2018; Lawrence et al.,
2019; Uittenbroek et al., 2019). There is limited empirical evidence
that public participation per se improves environmental outcomes
(Callahan, 2007; Reed, 2008; Newig and Fritsch, 2009). Major factors
determining outcomes are tacit, including trust, environmental
preferences, power relationships and the true motivations of sponsor
and participants (Reed, 2008; Newig and Fritsch, 2009). Difficulties
in realising the anticipated benefits of public participation have been

Chapter 4

shown in coastal settings including Queensland, Australia (Burton
and Mustelin, 2013), Germany's Baltic Sea (Schernewski et al.,
2018), England (Mehring et al, 2018), Sweden (Brink and Wamsler,
2019), and South Africa (Ziervogel, 2019). Research by Uittenbroek
et al. (2019) in the Netherlands, for example, shows that public
participation objectives are more probable if participation objectives
and process design principles and practices are co-produced by
community and government stakeholders. In some cities in the
Global South, experience shows that a focus on building effective
multi-sector governance institutions can facilitate ongoing public
involvement in adaptation planning and implementation, and
enhance long-term adaptation prospects (Chu, 2016b).

Conflict resolution refers to formal and informal processes that enable
parties to create peaceful solutions for their disputes (Bercovitch et al.,
2008). They range from litigation and adjudication to more collaborative
processes based on facilitation, mediation and negotiation (Susskind
et al., 1999; Bercovitch et al, 2008). Such processes can be used in
the public domain to make difficult social choices. Whilst it may be
impossible to eliminate controversy and disputes due to SLR, conflict
resolution can be foundational for achieving effective, fair and just
outcomes for coastal communities (Susskind et al., 2015; Nursey-Bray,
2017). Whereas some responses to social conflict (see definition
in Section 4.4.3.3) can be destructive (e.g., resorting to violence),
constructive approaches to conflict resolution (e.g., negotiation and
mediation) can help disputants satisfy their interests and even have
transformational adaptation potential (Laws et al, 2014; Nursey-Bray,
2017). Laws et al. (2014), for example, use the term ‘hot adaptation’ to
describe adaptation efforts that harness the energy and engagement
that conflict provokes; and create opportunities for public deliberation
and social learning about complex problems like SLR. Such an approach
has particular relevance in settings most at risk to SLR. Realising this
potential is, however, challenging in the face of local politics and the
differential power and influence of disputants. These realities have
been accounted for in public conflict resolution scholarship and
practice for many decades (Forester, 1987; Dukes, 1993; Forester, 2006),
and lessons learned are beginning to be applied to adaptation (Laws
et al., 2014; Nursey-Bray, 2017; Sultana and Thompson, 2017) and SLR
response planning (Susskind et al., 2015). Conflict was turned into
cooperation in some villages in floodplains in Bangladesh, for example,
by facilitated dialogue and incentivised cooperation between local
communities and government, with external facilitator assistance,
leading to improved water security in a climate stressed environment
(Sultana and Thompson, 2017). At a larger scale, the Mekong River
Commission, with its water diplomacy framework, provides an
institutional structure and processes, with technical support, and legal
and strategic mechanisms, that help to negotiate solutions for complex
delta problems and, in so doing, help avert widespread destruction of
livelihoods and conflict (Kittiknoun and Staubli, 2018).

Many of the techniques used in planning, public participation and
conflict resolution, at times together with decision analysis and support
tools, are being applied in combination. In New Zealand, for example,
a participatory approach was used to combine dynamic adaptive
pathways planning with multi-criteria and real options analysis
(Section 4.4.4.3.4) to develop a 100-year strategy to manage coastal
hazard risk (Lawrence et al, 2019; see Box 4.1). Public participation

401

 
 

Chapter 4

thereby helped to shift communities towards a longer-term view
and towards considering a wider range of adaptation options and
pathways. Such combined approaches are also sometimes referred to
as Community Based Adaptation, which involve local people directly
in understanding and addressing the climate change risks they face
(Box 4.4). These processes and practices are used in many settings,
from small, isolated indigenous communities to large-scale coastal
infrastructure projects in both the Global North and South. See
Table 4.9 in Section 4.4.5 for illustrative examples.

4.4.4.3 Decision Analysis Methods

4,4.4.3.1 Introduction

Decision analysis methods are formal methods that help to identify
alternatives that perform best or well with regard to given objectives.
An alternative (also called response option or as a sequence of
options over time: adaptation pathway) is a specific combination of
SLR responses (See Section 4.4.3). Each alternative is characterised
for each possible future state-of-the world (e.g., levels of SLR or
socioeconomic development) by one or several attributes, which may
measure any relevant social, ecological, or economic effect associated
with choosing and implementing the alternative (Kleindorfer
et al., 1993). Attributes commonly used include cost of adaptation
alternatives, monetary and non-monetary benefits of the SLR impacts
avoided, or net present value (NPV), which is the difference between
discounted monetised benefits over time and discounted costs over
time. Formal decision analysis is one way to support social choices
that is generally suggested for decision support if decisions are
complex and involve large investments, as is frequently the case in
coastal contexts in the face of SLR.

In order to be effective, decision analysis needs to be embedded in a
governance process that accounts for societal needs and objectives
(Sections 4.4.4.2 and 4.4.5). This is because decision analysis entails
a number of normative choices about the objectives chosen, the
criteria used, the specific methods and data applied, the set of
alternatives considered, and the attributes used to characterise
alternatives. These choices need to reflect the diversity of values,
preference and goals of all stakeholders involved in and affected
by a decision. Furthermore, decision analysis needs to consider
all available knowledge, including all major uncertainties in both
climate and non-climate factors, ambiguities in expert opinions,
and differences in approaches, because a partial consideration of
uncertainty and ambiguity could misguide the choice of adaptation
alternatives (high confidence; Renn, 2008; Jones et al., 2014; Hinkel
and Bisaro, 2016).

Since AR5, the literature on coastal decision analysis has advanced
significantly, specifically addressing the large uncertainty about
post-2050 SLR through i) using robust decision approaches instead
of expected utility, ii) iterating or adapting decisions over time, and
iii) increasing flexibility of responses. Each advance is elaborated
below. Furthermore, the coastal decision analysis literature also
stresses the consideration of multiple criteria or attributes, because
adaptation often involves stakeholders with differing objectives
and ways of valuing alternatives (Oddo et al., 2017). Many decision

402

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

making methods combine each of the three advances highlighted
here (Marchau et al., 2019). The suitability of each method depends
strongly on the specific context, including available resources,
technical capabilities, policy objectives, stakeholder preferences and
available information.

4.4.4.3.2 Using robustness criteria instead of expected utility

A growing literature on decision analysis of coastal adaptation
advocates the use of RDM approaches instead of maximising
expected utility approaches (Hallegatte et al, 2012; Haasnoot et al.,
2013; Lempert et al., 2013; Wong et al., 2017). The core criterion to
be considered for choosing between the two types of approaches
is whether one is confronted with a situation of shallow or deep
uncertainty (high confidence) (Lempert and Schlesinger, 2001; Kwakkel
et al., 2010; Kwakkel et al, 2016b; Hinkel et al., 2019). Uncertainty
is shallow when a single unambiguous objective or subjective
probability distribution can be attached to states-of-the-world.
Uncertainty is deep, when this is not possible, either because there
is no unambiguous method for deriving objective probabilities or
the subjective probability judgements of parties involved differ
(Cross-Chapter Box 4 in Chapter 1; Type 2).

Expected utility approaches can only be applied for identifying an
optimal response in situations of shallow uncertainty. This is because
these approaches require a probability distribution over states of
the world in order to identify the optimal alternative which leads
to the highest expected utility (ie., the probability weighted sum
of the utilities of all outcomes under a given alternative and all
states-of-the-world; Simpson et al., 2016). A prominent example
of this approach is cost-benefit analysis under risk, which assesses
expected outcomes across states of the world in terms of NPV (the
discounted stream of net benefits). Cost-benefit analysis has several
well-known limitations, such as its sensitivity to discount rates and
the difficulty to monetise ecological, cultural and other intangible
benefits (Section 1.1.4) that have been widely discussed in the
climate change literature (Chambwera et al., 2014; Kunreuther et al.,
2014; Dennig, 2018).

In the context of coastal adaptation, uncertainty is only shallow
if projected SLR does not significantly differ between low end
(e.g., RCP2.6) and high end (e.g., RCP8.5) scenarios (Hinkel et al,
2019). The point in time when this is the case (i.e., time of scenario
divergence) depends on what difference in expected utility matters
to the particular stakeholders involved in a decision. The time of
scenario divergence also differs across locations. In locations where
the internal sea level variability is large as compared to relative SLR,
it takes longer before the differences in sea levels under low end and
high end scenarios become apparent. Figure 4.15 illustrates this effect
for the ESL projections of this report (Sections 4.2.3.2 and 4.2.3.4),
following the approach of Hinkel et al. (2019). Under the assumption
that a 10% statistical distance between the distributions of RCP2.6
and RCP8.5 is decision relevant, scenario divergence occurs before
2050 for approximately two thirds of coastal sites with sufficient
observational data, but for 7% of locations this occurs later than 2070.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

In principle, a single unambiguous probability distribution on future
sea levels could also be attained beyond the time of scenario
divergence by attributing subjective probabilities to emission
scenarios, but individuals may significantly disagree in their subjective
probabilities, which again results in deep uncertainty (Lempert and
Schlesinger, 2001; Stirling, 2010). For this reason, very few studies
that assign subjective probabilities to emission scenarios are found in
the literature (Woodward et al., 2014; Abadie, 2018). But even before
the year of scenario divergence is reached, uncertainty about relative
SLR can be deep, because of deep uncertainties about non-climatic
contributors to relative sea level change, such as VLM during or after
earthquakes and human-induced subsidence (Cross-Chapter 5 in
Chapter 1; Section 4.2.2.4; Hinkel et al., 2019).

Under situations of deep uncertainty, RDM approaches aim to identify
alternatives that perform reasonably well (i.e., ‘are robust’) under a
wide range of states-of-the-world or scenarios and hence do not
require probability assessments. These approaches include minimax
or minimax regret (Savage, 1951), info gap theory (Ben-Haim, 2006),
robust optimisation (Ben-Tal et al, 2009) and exploratory modelling
methods that create a large ensemble of plausible future scenarios
for each alternative, and then use search and visualisation techniques
to extract robust alternatives (Lempert and Schlesinger, 2000). SLR
examples of RDM include Brekelmans (2012) who minimise the
average and maximum regret across a range of SLR scenarios for
investments in dike rings in the Netherlands and Lempert et al. (2013)
who apply RDM in Hoh-Chi-Minh City.

But even if SLR uncertainty is shallow, RDM are more suitable than
expected utility approaches if parties involved or affected by a
decision have a low uncertainty tolerance, because the goal of the
uncertainty intolerant decision maker is to avoid major damages
under most or all circumstances (Hinkel et al., 2019).

An adaptation strategy developed based on the maximisation of
expected utility may not meet this goal, because worst case damages
occurring can exceed expected damages by orders of magnitude.

The uncertainty tolerance of stakeholders is also determining how
large of a SLR range needs to be considered in RDM. Stakeholders
(Le., those deciding and those affected by a decision) that have a
high uncertainty tolerance (e.g., those planning for investments that
can be very easily adapted) can use the combined /ikely range of
RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 (0.29-1.10 m by 2100) for long-term adaptation
decisions. For stakeholders with a low uncertainty tolerance (e.g.
those planning for coastal safety in cities and long term investment in
critical infrastructure) it is meaningful to also consider SLR above this
range, because a 17% chance of GMSL exceeding this range under
RCP8.5 is too high to be tolerated from this point of view (Ranger
et al., 2013; Hinkel et al., 2015; Hinkel et al., 2019).

Independent of the debate about whether to apply expected utility or
robust decision making approaches, there is an extensive literature
that applies scenario-based cost-benefit analysis. For example,
this approach has been applied for setting the safety standards of
Dutch dike rings (Kind, 2014; Eijgenraam et al, 2016), exploring

Chapter 4

future protection alternatives for New York (Aerts et al., 2014), Ho
Chi Minh City (Scussolini et al., 2017), and for many other locations.
Scenario-based cost-benefit analysis differs from cost-benefit analysis
under risk discussed above in that scenario-based cost-benefit analysis
is not applied to rank alternatives across scenarios, but a ‘separate’
cost-benefit analysis is applied within each emission or SLR scenario
considered. While this identifies the optimal alternative under each
scenario, it does not formally address the problem faced by a coastal
decision maker, namely to decide across scenarios (Lincke and Hinkel,
2018). Nevertheless, the results of scenario-based cost-benefit analysis
(ie, NPV of each alternative under each scenario) provide guidance
for decision makers and can also be used as inputs (i.e., as attributes)
to robust and flexible decision making approaches.

4.4.4,3.3 Adapting decisions over time

Irrespective of whether expected utility or robustness criteria are
applied, there is high confidence that an effective way of dealing with
large uncertainties is adaptive decision making (also called iterative
decision making, adaptive planning or adaptive management), which
maintains that decision and decision analysis should be conducted
within an iterative policy cycle. This approach includes monitoring of
sea level variables and evaluation of alternatives in this light in order
to learn from past decisions and collect information to inform future
decisions (Haasnoot et al., 2013; Barnett et al., 2014; Burch et al.,
2014; Jones et al., 2014; Wise et al., 2014; Kelly, 2015; Lawrence and
Haasnoot, 2017). Such a staged approach is especially suitable for
coastal adaptation due to the long lead and lifetimes of many coastal
adaptation measures and the deep uncertainties in future sea levels
(Hallegatte, 2009; Kelly, 2015). Prominent representatives of methods
that entail this idea are Dynamic Adaptive Policy Pathways (Haasnoot
et al, 2013) and Dynamic Adaptation Planning (Walker et al.,
2001). An important prerequisite for any adaptive decision-making
approach is a monitoring system that can detect sea level signals
sufficiently early to enable the required responses (Hermans et al.,
2017; Haasnoot et al., 2018; Stephens et al., 2018).

In recent years, many different frameworks for adaptive decision
making have been put forward, including Adaptive Policy Making
(Walker et al., 2001), Dynamic Adaptive Policy Pathways (Haasnoot
et al, 2013), Dynamic Adaptive Planning (Walker et al., 2013),
Iterative risk management (Jones et al, 2014) and Engineering
Options Analysis (de Neufville and Smet, 2019). Each frameworks
emphasises particular aspects of adaptive decision making and has
merits in specific situations depending on the preferences, goals,
uncertainties and information at stake (Marchau et al., 2019).
Nevertheless, all of these frameworks share the following generic
and iterative steps

1. Set the stage: Identify current situation, objectives, options
(alternatives) and uncertainties.

2. Develop a dynamic plan, which consists of a basic plan plus
contingency actions to be carried out based on observed triggers.

3. Implement basic plan and monitor system for triggers.

4. Monitor and act upon triggers.

403

 
 

Chapter 4

(a) Papeete (Tahiti)

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

(b) New York (USA)

(c) Cuxhaven (Germany)

 

Extreme
sea level 4

(m)

Legend

=——= Divergence

== RCP2.5
—— RCP8.5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

T
2020 2040

2080

2020 2040

year

2020 2040 2060 2080
year

T
2060

 

 

2030

2040

2050

2060 2070 2080

Year of scenario divergence between RCP2.6 and RCP8.5

Figure 4.15 | Year of scenario divergence between extreme sea level projections for Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP)2.6 and RCP8.5 for all tide-gauge
locations with sufficient observational data relative to a 1986-2005 baseline (bottom panel). Time of divergence is defined using a 10% threshold in the statistical distance
between the two distributions, which can be graphically interpreted as the first year in which at least 10% of the area under the probability distribution function (PDF) of
RCP8.5 lies outside of the area under the upper half (ie, above the 50th percentile) of the PDF of RCP2.6. Upper panels indicate the median and 5-95% range of future
extreme sea level (ESL) relative to the 1986-2005 baseline for three tide gauge locations with low variability (Papeete), medium variability (New York) and high variability
(Cuxhaven). Locations with low variability have a relatively early scenario divergence.

404
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

4.4.4.3.4 Increasing flexibility of responses

An idea closely related to adaptive decision making is to keep future
alternatives open by favouring flexible alternatives over non-flexible
ones. An alternative is said to be ‘flexible’ if it allows switching to
other alternatives once the implemented alternative is no longer
effective. For example, a flexible protection approach would be to
build small dikes on foundations designed for higher dikes, in order
to be able to raise dikes in the future should SLR necessitate this.

A prominent and straightforward method that addresses the objective
of flexibility is adaptation pathways analysis (Haasnoot et al., 2011;
Haasnoot et al., 2012), which is one component of Dynamic Adaptive
Policy Pathways. The method graphically represents alternative
combinations of measures over time together with information on
the conditions under which alternatives cease to be effective in
meeting agreed objectives, as well as possible alternatives that will
then be available. As time and SLR progress, monitoring may trigger
a decision to switch to another alternative. Adaptation pathway
analysis has been widely applied both in the scientific literature as
well as in practical cases. Applications after AR5 include Indonesia
(Butler et al, 2014), New York City (Rosenzweig and Solecki, 2014),
Singapore (Buurman and Babovic, 2016) and Australia (Lin and
Shullman, 2017). In New Zealand, the method has been included in
national guidance for coastal hazard and climate change decision
making (Lawrence et al., 2018). There is high confidence that the
method is useful in interaction with decision makers and other
stakeholders, helping to identify possible alternative sequences of
measures over time, avoiding lock-in, and showing decision makers
that there are several possible pathways leading to the same desired
future (Haasnoot et al., 2012; Haasnoot et al., 2013; Brown et al.,
2014; Werners et al., 2015).

Alternatives can also be characterised through multiple attributes
such as costs, effectiveness, co-benefits, social acceptability, etc.,
which in turn can be used in multi-attribute decision making methods
(Haasnoot et al., 2013). An important attribute is transfer cost, which
is the cost of course correction (switching from one alternative to
another), reflecting the potential for path dependency (Haasnoot
et al., 2019). Delaying decisions and opting for flexible measures
introduces extra costs, such as transfer costs. Also, flexible measures
are often more expensive than inflexible ones, and damages may
occur whilst delaying the decision. An important question therefore
is whether it is cheaper to implement a flexible measure now or to
wait and implement a less flexible (i.e, cheaper) measure later in
time when more information is at hand.

Chapter 4

Technically more demanding methods such as real-options analysis
(Dixit et al., 1994), and decision tree analysis (Conrad, 1980), can
also find pathways that are economically efficient in terms of
flexibility and timing of adaptation. There is little application of
these approaches in the SLR literature. For example, Woodward et al.
(2014) applied real-options analysis to determine flood defences
around the Thames Estuary, London, England; Buurman and Babovic
(2016) for dimate-proofing drainage networks in Singapore; Dawson
et al. (2018) for coastal rail infrastructure in southern England; and
Kim et al. (2018) for assessing flood defences in southern England.
A requirement for applying real-options analysis and decision tree
analysis is to quantify today how much will have been learned at
a given point in time in the future. The few applications of these
methods to SLR-related decisions in the literature have generally used
ad-hoc assumptions. For example, Woodward et al. (2011) assumed
either perfect learning (i.e., in 2040, which SLR trajectory is occurring
will be known) or no learning (i.¢., uncertainty ranges and confidence
in these remains as today). Others have derived learning rates from
comparing past progress in SLR projections and then applied these to
the future. An example is given by Dawson et al. (2018) who derive
learning rates from the 2002 and 2009 SLR projections of the UK
Climate Impacts Programme and apply these in real-options analysis.

4,4.4.3.5 Research needs

Four general gaps can be identified in the literature. First, the
generation of SLR information is insufficiently coupled to the use of
this information in decision analysis. This constitutes a limitation, as
different coastal decision contexts require different decision analysis
methods, which in turn require different SLR information. Specifically,
applications of decision analysis methods generally convert existing
sea level information to fit their method, often misinterpreting
the information, making arbitrary assumptions or losing essential
information in the process (Hinkel et al, 2015; Bakker et al., 2017; Van
der Pol and Hinkel, 2018). Second, with the exception of adaptation
pathway analysis, methods of robust and flexible decision making
are under-represented in the literature despite their suitability (Van
der Pol and Hinkel, 2018). Third, research is necessary to compare
the various methods, to identity which methods are most suitable in
which context and to develop consistent categorisations of methods
(Hallegatte et al., 2012; Haasnoot et al., 2013; Hinkel et al., 2015;
Watkiss et al., 2015; Dittrich et al., 2016; Suckall et al., 2018). Fourth,
future research needs to address how to embed decision analysis
better in real world planning and decision making processes,
recognising that adaptation to SLR is a multi-stakeholder process
often characterised by conflicting interests and interdependence
between stakeholders (Section 4.4.3). Addressing these gaps
requires closer cooperation between SLR sciences, decision science,
and planning and governance scholars. An underlying challenge is
to design and integrate relevant formal decision making approaches
into the heterogeneous reality of local planning and decision
making cultures, institutions, processes and practices, often with
community-specific needs and requirements (see Box 4.4).

405

 
Chapter 4 Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Box 4.4 | Community Based Experiences: Canadian Arctic and Hawkes Bay, New Zealand

Climate-Change Adaptation on the Canadian Arctic Coast

Communities of the Inuvialuit Settlement Region (ISR), established under the Inuvialuit Final Agreement (Government of Canada,
1984), include the delta communities of Aklavik and Inuvik (the regional hub) and the coastal hamlets of Tuktoyaktuk, Paulatuk, Sachs
Harbour, and Ulukhaktok. The Inuvialuit Regional Corporation (IRC) administers Inuvialuit lands, a portfolio of businesses, and social and
cultural services, including co-management of food harvest resources. Other social, education, health, and infrastructure services are
managed by the Government of the Northwest Territories and municipal Councils. Community Corporations and Hunters and Trappers
Committees handle other aspects of governance and socioeconomic development. Very high ground-ice content renders the coast and
coastal infrastructure in this region sensitive to rising temperatures and largely precludes conventional hard shore protection. Higher
temperatures (>3°C rise since 1948), combined with rising sea level and a lengthening open-water season, contribute to accelerating
coastal erosion, threatening infrastructure, cultural resources, and the long-term viability of Tuktoyaktuk Harbour, while impacting
winter travel on ice, access to subsistence resources, food security, safety and well-being (Lamoureux et al., 2015). Despite ongoing
shore recession, there is strong attachment to the most vulnerable sites and a reluctance to relocate. Adaptation challenges include
technical issues (e.g., the ice-rich substrate, sea ice impacts), high transportation costs (until recent completion of an all-weather road
to Tuktoyaktuk, heavy or bulky material had to come in by sea or ice road), availability of experienced labour, and, crucially, financial
resources. Other inhibitors of adaptation include access to knowledge in suitable forms for uptake, gaps in understanding, research
readiness, and institutional barriers related to multiple levels of decision making (Ford et al., 2016a). The IRC, as the indigenous
leadership organisation in the ISR, is moving to play a more proactive role in driving adaptation at the regional level (IRC, 2016),
as indigenous leaders across the country are demanding more control of the northern research agenda for adaptation action (Bell,
2016; ITK, 2018). For a number of years, IRC has promoted community-based monitoring, incorporating Inuvialuit knowledge in
partnership with trusted research collaborators. Recently IRC is exploring partnership with the community-based ice awareness service
and social enterprise, SmartICE Inc. Despite the inherent adaptability of Inuit culture, concentration in locality bound communities
dependent on physical infrastructure has increased vulnerability, as changing climate has raised exposure. Various government and
academic initiatives and tools over many years to promote resilience and adaptation strategies have had limited impact. Current
engagement supporting locally driven knowledge acquisition and management capacity, combined with IRC institutional leadership
with government support, are expected to enable a more effective co-designed and co-delivered adaptation agenda.

Clifton to Tangoio Coastal Hazards Strategy 2120 Hawkes Bay, New Zealand:

A community-based and science-informed decision making process

New Zealand is applying tools for decision making under deep uncertainty (Lawrence and Haasnoot, 2017; Lawrence et al., 2019)
to address the changing risk and uncertainties related to SLR impacts on coastal settlements. An opportunity arose in 2017 for
the Resilience to Nature’s Challenges National Science Challenge, “The Living Edge” research project (https://resiliencechallenge.
nz/edge), to co-develop a Coastal Hazards Strategy for the Clifton to Tangoio coast in Hawkes Bay, New Zealand. The Strategy,
a joint council/ community/ iwi Maori initiative (Kench et al, 2018), planned to use Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis (MCDA) within
their decision framework — a static tool in time and space, unsuited for decision making where changing risk and uncertainties exist
over long timeframes. The Dynamic Adaptive Policy Pathways (Haasnoot et al., 2013) approach and a modified Real Options Analysis
were proposed by the ‘Edge Team’ and integrated with MCDA (Lawrence et al., 2019) in a process comprising a Technical Advisory
Group of councils and two community panels of directly affected communities, infrastructure agencies, business, conservation interests,
and iwi Maori. Many adaptation options and pathways were assessed for their ability to reduce risk exposure and maintain flexibility
for switching pathways over a 100-year timeframe, which is the planning timeframe mandated by the New Zealand Coastal Policy
Statement (Minister of Conservation, 2010) with the force of law under the Resource Management Act, 1991. The recently revised
New Zealand national coastal hazards and climate change guidance for local government (Bell et al., 2017a) provided context. This
novel assessment, engagement and planning approach to the formulation of a Coastal Hazards Strategy was undertaken through a
non-statutory planning process. The agreed options and pathways have yet to be implemented through statutory processes that will
test the risk tolerance of the wider community. This example illustrates how tailor-made assessment that addresses SLR uncertainty
and change by keeping options open and reducing path-dependency, and engagement and planning processes can be initiated with
leadership across councils, sectors and stakeholders, before being implemented, thus reducing contestation. Lessons learned include
the central role of: leadership, governance and iwi Maori; Local Authority collaboration; taking time to build trust; independent
knowledge brokers for credibility; nuanced project leadership and facilitation, enabling a community-based process. The preferred
intervention options and pathways have been agreed for implementation. The remaining challenges are to cost the range of actions,
decide funding formulae, develop physical and socioeconomic signals and triggers for monitoring changing risk, embed the strategy
in statutory plans and practices, and socialise the strategy with the wider public in the context of competing priorities.

 

406
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

4.4.5 Enabling Conditions and Lessons Learned

From ‘Practice’

In addition to the literature on planning, public participation, conflict
resolution and decision making assessed in the last Section, much is
being learned from practical experiences gained in adapting to climate
change and SLR at the coast. Some salient enabling conditions and
lessons learnt are illustrated in Table 4.9 through case studies or
examples of real-world experience in diverse coastal communities
around the world, structured according to the five overarching SLR
governance challenges identified in Section 4.4.3. In these cases,
the following stands out as being foundational for enabling the
implementation of SLR responses and addressing the governance
challenges that arise. First, effective SLR responses take a long-term
perspective (e.g., 100 years and beyond) and explicitly account for the
uncertainty of locality-specific risks beyond 2050. Second, given the

Chapter 4

locality-specific but cross-cutting nature of SLR impacts, improving
cross-scale and cross-domain coordination of SLR responses may
be beneficial. Third, prioritising social vulnerability and equity in SLR
responses may be essential because SLR impacts and risks are spread
unevenly across society, and within and between coastal communities.
Fourth, safe community arenas for working together constructively can
help to resolve social conflict arising from SLR. Fifth, a sharp increase
may be needed in governance capabilities to tackle the complex
problems caused by SLR. There is, however, no one-size-fits-all solution
to SLR, and responses need to be tailored to the environmental, social,
economic, political, technological, and cultural context in which they
are to be implemented. Enablers that work in one context might not
be effective in another case. As sea level rises, more experience in
addressing SLR governance challenges will be gained, which can in
turn be evaluated in order to obtain a better contextual understanding
of enabling conditions and effective SLR governance.

Table 4.9 | Enablers and lessons learned to overcome governance challenges arising from sea level rise (SLR).

Illustrative examples

 

Ss Enablers and lessons learned
Cail ne ty

Take action now with the long-term in
mind, keeping options open so that new
responses can be developed over time (Flynn et al., 2018)
(high confidence) (Section 4.4.2) (Haasnoot
et al., 2013; Hurlimann et al., 2014; Dewulf
and Termeer, 2015; Termeer et al., 2015;
Stephens et al., 2018; OECD, 2019)

Time

horizon and — Secure buy-in from key governance actors

uncertainty

 

Participatory scenario planning has been used widely including in Lagos, Nigeria (Ajibade et al., 2016), Dhaka,
Bangladesh (Ahmed et al., 2018), Rotterdam, Netherlands, Hong Kong and Guangzhou, China (Francesch-Huidobro
et al. 2017), Maputo, Mozambique {Broto et al., 2015), Santos, Brazil (Marengo et al, 2019), Arctic (Flynn et al.,
2018), Indonesia (Butler et al., 2016a), Dutch delta (Dewulf and Termeer, 2015; Termeer et al., 2015; Bloemen et al.,
2019) and Bangladesh {Paprocki and Hug, 2018). Lessons include:

— Develop shared coastal visions (Tuts et al., 2015; Brown et al., 2016; OECD, 2019)

— Use participatory planning processes that respect and reconcile different values, belief systems and cultures

— Address power imbalances and human development imperatives {Broto et al., 2015; Butler et al., 2016a)

Long-term adaptation pathways have been developed in New Zealand using ‘serious games’
{Flood et al., 2018) and hybrid processes to integrate decision analysis methods (Section 4.4.2) with public partici-
pation and planning Section 4.4.3) (Cradock-Henry et al., 2018; Lawrence et al., 2019). Lessons include:
— Develop enabling national guidance, policy and legislation that requires a long-term focus {e.g., 100 years)
and prioritises measures to minimise risk escalation

— Involve coastal stakeholders in adaptation planning
— Draw on local, indigenous and scientific knowledges

 

 

Avoid new development commitments
in high-risk locations (Section 4.4.3)
(medium evidence, high agreement)
{Hurlimann and March, 2012; Glavovic
and Smith, 2014; Hurlimann et al., 2014;
Tuts et al., 2015; Berke and Stevens, 2016;
Butler et al., 2016b; OECD, 2019)

 

Spatial planning to regulate development at risk from SLR is underway in many locations, including Victoria,
Australia (Hurlimann et al, 2014) and Florida, USA (Butler et al, 2016a; Vella et al., 2016). Limiting future develop-
ment in high risk areas is much easier than dealing with existing assets at risk (Tuts et al, 2015; OECD, 2019)

Proactive managed retreat through flexible, tailor-made provisions that address distinctive local circum-
stances is under way in, for example, USA and Australia, revealing the importance of understanding risks politi-
cians face from local opposition, and distributional impacts {(Dyckman et al, 2014; Gibbs, 2016; Siders, 2019). Post
Hurricane Sandy managed retreat from Staten Island, New York City, USA, was enabled by community receptivity
to buyouts and political expedience (Koslov, 2019; Box 4.1). Lessons include:

— Limit new development commitments in high risk areas

— Facilitate property abandonment as inundation occurs

— Leverage the window of opportunity coastal disasters create (Kousky, 2014)

 

 

407

 
 

Chapter 4

Governance
Cait ty

Cross-scale
and
cross-domain
coordination

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Enablers and lessons learned

Build vertical and horizontal govern-
ance networks and linkages across
policy domains and sectors to legiti-
mise decisions, build trust and improve
coordination (high confidence).
{Glavovic and Smith, 2014; Colenbrander
and Sowman, 2015; Dutra et al., 2015;
Sowman et al., 2016; Van Putten

et al., 2016; Forino et al., 2018; Lund, 2018;
Pinto et al., 2018; Clar, 2019; Pittman

and Armitage, 2019)

Illustrative examples

In the Lesser Antilles multiple state and non-state actors are working together, building trust, and coor-
dinating activities through decentralisation and self-organisation (Pittman and Armitage, 2019). Lessons
include:

— Participation in collaborative projects

— Multilateral agreements between states

— Boundary spanning organisations connecting governance actors, citizens and states

— Extreme events can be a catalyst for raising awareness and political salience

— Leadership by central actors and capacitated teams

— Mobilise capabilities of communities and non-state actors

In South Devon, UK, decentralisation, privatisation and fragmentation impacts adaptation (Den Uyl and
Russel, 2018). Lessons include:

— Identify policy inconsistencies and clarify problem-ownership, responsibility and accountability

— Explore ways to leverage national funding to support local action

— Establish networks to facilitate interaction, dialogue and coordination

 

Social learning, experimentation

and innovation inform technical
solutions, build shared understand-

ing and develop locally appropriate
SLR responses (high confidence).
{Dyckman et al., 2014; Glavovic and Smith,
2014; Dutra et al, 2015; Ensor and Harvey,
2015; Chu et al., 2018; McFadgen

and Huitema, 2018; Mazeka, 2019;
Wolfram et al., 2019)

Innovation is underway to enhance social learning, reflexivity and coalition building (Chu et al., 2018;

Bellinson and Chu, 2019; Wolfram et al., 2019), e.g., Surat, India (Chu, 2016a; Chu, 2016b), Santos, Brazil (Marengo

et al., 2019), Portland, USA (Fink, 2019), and port cities in Europe and East Asia (Blok and Tschétschel, 2016), In

Surat, for example, adaptation experiments created valuable arenas for engaging governance actors and stakehold-

ers, understanding climate and development co-benefits, and testing new ideas (Chu, 2016b). Lessons include:

— Design experiments to account for how local political economic factors shape adaptation, for example, under-
standing local history and politics reveals how adaptation trade-offs are made in city decision making

— Ensure experiments generate socioeconomic benefits and climate-development co-benefits

Accelerate social learning and governance innovations through transnational municipal networks
together with local efforts (Hughes et al, 2018), with processes developed and institutionalised through political
negotiation, e.g., Rotterdam, Netherlands, and Berkeley, USA (Bellinson and Chu, 2019)

 

Equity
and social
vulnerability

 

Recognise the political nature of adap-
tation and explicitly address vulnerabil-
ity and equity implications to achieve
enduring, enabling impact of responses
(high confidence).

{Eriksen et al., 2015; Sovacool et al., 2015;
Tuts et al., 2015; Adger et al., 2017; Hardy
et al., 2017; Holland, 2017; Dol&ak and
Prakash, 2018; Finkbeiner et al., 2018;
Sovacool, 2018; Warner et al., 201 8b;
OECD, 2019)

Rights-based approach to participatory adaptation planning in Maputo, Mozambique, fosters a more
inclusive and potentially fairer city (Broto et al, 2015). Lessons include:

— Expose drivers of structural inequity and vulnerability

— Link adaptation and human development imperatives

— Raise awareness and public support for adaptation with equity

Race-aware adaptation planning can reveal racial inequalities and overcome passive indifference as
shown in, for example, Sapelo Island, Georgia, USA (Hardy et al, 2017). Lessons include:

— Develop an understanding of historical racial drivers of coastal land ownership, development and risk

— Address barriers African Americans face in participating in adaptation planning

 

 

Focus on enabling community capabili-
ties for responding to SLR, where neces-
sary complementing community knowl-
edge, skills and resources, and political
influence and problem solving abilities,
with external assistance and govern-
ment support (high confidence).
{Schlosberg, 2012; Musa et al., 2016; Vedeld
et al., 2016; Elrick-Barr et al., 2017; Warrick
et al., 2017; DolSak and Prakash, 2018)

 

Various professionals can play valuable support roles in leveraging and building adaptive capacity and resil-
ience of small island communities, recognising diverse needs and capabilities (Robinson, 2017; Weir et al., 2017;
Kelman, 2018; Petzold and Magnan, 2019). For example, in poor Caribbean communities, social workers are helping
strengthen social capital, enabling individuals to understand and integrate risk, resilience and sustainability prin-
ciples into day-to-day decision making, and promoting socially and environmentally just adaptation Joseph, 2017).

In the Solomon Islands, Pacific, community-based approaches enhance community capacity to work with
external organisations to plan together, obtain resources, and respond to SLR on their own terms (Warrick et al.,
2017). The value of integrating traditional community responses with local government efforts has been demon-
strated in Micronesian islands {Nunn et al., 2017b).

Local collective action in Monkey River, Belize, helped to overcome power asymmetries and to obtain
support otherwise unavailable to vulnerable community members. Working with journalists, researchers and
local NGOs, was key for villagers to have concerns heard and a solution found for coastal erosion {Karlsson and
Hovelsrud, 2015).

Rural coastal community resilience boosted in Albemarle Pamlico Peninsula of North Carolina, USA, by
focused attention on local needs through capacity building, and ensuring local voices heard in adaptation planning
(Jurjonas and Seekamp, 2018).

 

 

408
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Governance

Cail ne ty

Social conflict

Enablers and lessons learned

Social conflict can be reduced by
tailor-made design and facilitation of
participation processes, and involving
stakeholders early and consistently
throughout decision making and imple-
mentation of SLR responses (medium
evidence, high agreement).

{Burton and Mustelin, 2013; Berke and
Stevens, 2016; Gorddard et al., 2016;
Webler et al., 2016; Schlosberg et al., 2017;
Kirshen et al., 2018; Lawrence et al., 2018;
Mehring et al, 2018; Nkoana et al., 2018;
Schernewski et al., 2018; Yusuf et al., 2018b;
Uittenbroek et al., 2019)

Chapter 4

Illustrative examples

Public participation has been foundational for South Africa’s coastal management, risk reduction and
adaptation efforts since 1994 (Celliers et al., 2013; Daron and Colenbrander, 2015; Desportes and Colenbrander,
2016; Glavovic et al., 2018; Colenbrander, 2019). Lessons include:

— Create opportunities to understand and address technical, sociopolitical and economic realities in an integrated
way {Colenbrander and Sowman, 2015; Daron and Colenbrander, 2015)

— Incorporate conflict resolution mechanisms into engagement processes {Daron and Colenbrander, 2015;
Colenbrander et al., 2016; Colenbrander and Bavinck, 2017)

— Align informal engagement processes with formal statutory provisions (Colenbrander and Bavinck, 2017), taking
into account visible formal procedures and ‘invisible’ and informal ways in which knowledge is shared and
shapes government decision making {Leck and Roberts, 2015)

— Independent facilitators can play a crucial role bringing contending parties together; local government officials
can work as bureaucratic activists to create more inclusive, iterative and reflexive participation (Desportes and
Colenbrander, 2016)

— Sustain engagement, sequence participatory interventions with political and bureaucratic cycles (Pasquini et al,
2013) and secure enabling resources, including channelling adaptation finance to local level (Colenbrander, 2019)

— Use practical ways to involve historically disadvantaged and socially vulnerable groups and communities, for
example, by choosing accessible locations, language(s) and culturally appropriate meeting protocols (Sowman
and Gawith, 1994; Ziervogel et al., 2016b)

— Dedicated environmental champions within local political leadership play a key role in mainstreaming adaptation
into local decision making (Pasquini et al., 2015)

 

Social conflict can be managed by cre-
ating safe arenas for inclusive, informed
and meaningful deliberation, negotia-
tion and collaborative problem-solving
(medium evidence, high agreement).
{Susskind et al., 1999; Laws et al., 2014;
Susskind et al., 2015; Glavovic, 2016;
Nursey-Bray, 2017; Sultana and

Thompson, 2017)

Turning conflict into cooperation in Baragaon village, northeast Bangladesh, and eight villages in Narial

district, southwest Bangladesh: A flexible and enabling process, founded on local institutions judged robust

and fair, prompted government investment in communities beyond their traditional focus on water infrastructure,

paid attention to local social dynamics and reduced elite domination and local conflict (Sultana & Thompson 2017).

Lessons include:

— Use local knowledge to inform adaptation actions

— Encourage institutional improvisation to address local concerns, for example, shifting government investment
from water infrastructure to community development

— Use external facilitation

— Incentivise participation by disadvantaged groups

Innovative collective coastal risk management process, New England (USA) Climate Adaptation Project,

developed by university researchers with partner communities to address coastal conflict by:

— Building community risk literacy, optimism and collaborative problem-solving capacity to take action

— Joint fact-finding, scenario planning, negotiating trade-offs, facilitated public dialogue, and securing support for
collaborative adaptation

— Establishing forums for ongoing public deliberation and social learning; and committing to continual adjustments
in face of change {Rumore, 2014; Susskind et al., 2015)

 

Complexity

 

 

Drawing upon multiple knowledge
systems to co-design and co-produce
SLR responses results in more accept-
able and implementable responses
(high confidence).

{Dannevig and Aall, 2015; Dutra et al.,
2015; Sovacool et al., 2015; Desportes
and Colenbrander, 2016; Adger et al., 2017;
Betzold and Mohamed, 2017; Onat et al.,
2018; Warner et al., 2018b; St. John Ill
and Yusuf, 2019)

 

The merits of drawing on scientific and local and indigenous knowledges is recognised in diverse set-
tings such as Australia (Dutra et al., 2015), Comoros {Betzold and Mohamed, 2017), Arctic (Flynn et al., 2018;
Huntington et al., 2019), Canada (Chouinard et al., 2015; Chouinard et al, 2017), Portugal (Costas et al, 2015)
and Brazil {Marengo et al. 2019).

Storytelling can build shared knowledge and understanding because stories are engaging, help people visu-
alise problems, see things from different positions, and recognise shared goals {Dutra et al, 2015; Elrick-Barr et al.,
2017). Maori, indigenous people of New Zealand, use oral history and storytelling to describe their relationship

to the coast, which informs how New Zealand responds to SLR (Carter, 2018; Lawrence et al., 2018).

Gaps between SLR science, policy and practice can be bridged by adaptation policy experiments
with support of actors and organisations who work across organisational boundaries to bring parties
together (Dannevig and Aall, 2015; St. John Ill and Yusuf, 2019).

 

 

409

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Chapter 4 Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities
CouaiiEMas Enablers and lessons learned Illustrative examples
Cait ty
The Dutch Delta Programme aims to future-proof the Netherlands against SLR (Bloemen et al., 2019).
Lessons learned in building governance capabilities to deal with associated complex problems include (Dewulf and
Termeer, 2015; Bloemen et al., 2018; Bloemen et al., 2019):
— Committing to long-term policy implementation at Cabinet level
— Allocate necessary dedicated budget and build capacity of government agencies to tackle complex problems,
Build governance capabilities to tackle for example, Senate resolution and programme uniting government and knowledge institutes on adaptation
complex problems (medium evidence, — Flexible and robust governance approaches and solutions build resilience, for example, independent programme
high agreement) alongside traditional administrative structures is more agile
Complexity {Moser et al, 2012; Head, 2014; Dewulf — Adaptation pathways help overcome the temporal mismatch between short-term decisions and long-term goals,
and Termeer, 2015; Head and Alford, 2015; explicitly accounting for uncertainty
Termeer et al., 2015; Kwakkel et al., 2016a; — Enabling provisions for fit-for-purpose local-level policy and practice are key to translating national programme
Termeer et al., 2016; Alford and Head, 2017; goals into local action, for example, liaison officers can bridge local, regional and national decision making arenas
Daviter, 2017; Head, 2018; McConnell, 2018) — Institutionalise monitoring and lesson learning {e.g., annual reporting to parliament, forums for politicians to
share experiences) to track progress, deal with multiple legitimate perspectives and tackle emergent problems
— Responsive governance arrangements address competing demands legitimately and timeously, for example,
steering groups, workshops and social media reveal stakeholder concerns
— Policy deadlocks or lock-in due to vested interests or short-term priorities can be tackled by taking a long-term
perspective, exploring alternative scenarios and incentivising novel solutions
4.4.6 Towards Climate Resilient Development Pathways In this context, AR5 put forward the vision of Climate Resilient

Our assessment shows that failure to mitigate GHG emissions or to
adapt to SLR will cause major disruptions to many low-lying coastal
communities and jeopardise achievement of all UN SDGs and other
societal aspirations. Immediate and ambitious GHG emissions
reduction is necessary (Hoegh-Guldberg et al, 2018) to contain the
rate and magnitude of SLR, and consequently adaptation prospects.
Under unmitigated emissions (RCP8.5), coastal societies, especially
poorer, rural and small islands societies, will struggle to maintain
their livelihoods and settlements during the 21st century (Sections
4.3.4; 4.4.2). Without mitigation, sea levels will continue to rise for
centuries, reaching 2.3-5.4 m by 2300 (likely range) and much more
beyond (Section 4.2.3.5), making adaptation extremely challenging,
if not impossible, for all low-lying coasts, including more intensively
developed urbanised coasts. But even with ambitious mitigation
(RCP2.6), sea levels will continue to rise, reaching 0.6-1.1 m by 2300
(likely range; Figure 4.2 Panel B). Hence, adaptation will continue
to be imperative irrespective of the uncertainties about future GHG
emissions and key physical processes such as those determining the
Antarctic contribution to SLR. Our assessment also shows that all types
of responses, from hard protection to EbA, advance and retreat, have
important and synergistic roles to play in an integrated and sequenced
response to SLR. The merits of a particular type of response, at a
particular point in time, critically depends on the biophysical, cultural,
economic, technical, institutional and political context.

410

Development Pathways, which is “a continuing process for
managing changes in the climate and other driving forces affecting
development, combining flexibility, innovativeness, and participative
problem solving with effectiveness in mitigating and adapting to
climate change” (Denton et al., 2014: 1106). Charting Climate
Resilient Development Pathways in the face of rising sea level
depends on how well mitigation, adaption and other sustainable
development efforts are combined, and the governance challenges
introduced by SLR are resolved. There are no panaceas for solving
these complex issues. However, the wise application of the planning,
public participation, conflict resolution, and decision analysis
methods assessed above can help coastal communities, cities and
settlements develop locally relevant, enabling and adaptive SLR
responses. Difficult social choices will nonetheless need to be made
as sea levels continue to rise. Given the SLR projections outlined here,
it is concluded that global resilience and sustainability prospects
depend, to a large extent, on how effectively coastal communities
develop and implement ambitious, forward-looking adaptation plans
in synchrony with drastic mitigation of GHG emissions.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities Chapter 4

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ 4.1 | What challenges does the inevitability of sea level rise present to coastal communities
and how can communities adapt?

As the global climate changes, rising sea levels, combined with high tides, storms and flooding, put coastal and island
communities increasingly at risk. Protection can be achieved by building dikes or seawalls and by maintaining natural features
like mangroves or coral reefs. Communities can also adjust by reclaiming land from the sea and adapting buildings to cope
with floods. However, all measures have their limits, and once these are reached people may ultimately have to retreat.
Choices made today influence how coastal ecosystems and communities can respond to sea level rise (SLR) in the future.
Reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions would not just reduce risks, but also open up more adaptation options.

Global Mean Sea Level (GMSL) is rising and it will continue to do so for centuries. Sustainable development
aspirations are at risk because many people, assets and vital resources are concentrated along low-lying coasts
around the world. Many coastal communities have started to consider the implications of SLR. Measures are
being taken to address coastal hazards exacerbated by rising sea level, such as coastal flooding due to extreme
events (e.g. storm surges, tropical cyclones, coastal erosion and salinisation). However, many coastal communities
are still not sufficiently adapted to today’s ESLs.

Scientific evidence about SLR is clear: GMSL rose by 1.5 mm yr-' during the period 1901-1990, accelerating to
3.6 mm yr during the period 2005-2015. It is likely to rise 0.61-1.10 m by 2100 if global GHG emissions are not
mitigated (RCP8.5). However, a rise of two or more metres cannot be ruled out. It could rise to more than 3 m
by 2300, depending on the level of GHG emissions and the response of the AIS, which are both highly uncertain.
Even if efforts to mitigate emissions are very effective, ESL events that were rare over the last century will
become common before 2100, and even by 2050 in many locations. Without ambitious adaptation, the combined
impact of hazards like coastal storms and very high tides will drastically increase the frequency and severity of
flooding on low-lying coasts.

SLR, as well as the context for adaptation, will vary regionally and locally, thus action to reduce risks related
to SLR takes different forms depending on the local circumstances. ‘Hard protection’, like dikes and seawalls,
can effectively reduce risk under two or more metres of SLR but it is inevitable that limits will be reached. Such
protection produces benefits that exceed its costs in low-lying coastal areas that are densely populated, as is the
case for many coastal cities and some small islands, but in general, poorer regions will not be able to afford hard
protection. Maintaining healthy coastal ecosystems, like mangroves, seagrass beds or coral reefs, can provide ‘soft
protection’ and other benefits. SLR can also be ‘accommodated’ by raising buildings on the shoreline, for example.
Land can be reclaimed from the sea by building outwards and upwards. In coastal locations where the risk is very
high and cannot be effectively reduced, ‘retreat’ from the shoreline is the only way to eliminate such risk. Avoiding
new development commitments in areas exposed to coastal hazards and SLR also avoids additional risk.

 

For those unable to afford protection, accommodation or advance measures, or when such measures are no
longer viable or effective, retreat becomes inevitable. Millions of people living on low-lying islands face this
prospect, including inhabitants of Small Island Developing States (SIDS), of some densely populated but less
intensively developed deltas, of rural coastal villages and towns, and of Arctic communities who already face
melting sea ice and unprecedented changes in weather. The resultant impacts on distinctive cultures and ways
of life could be devastating. Difficult trade-offs are therefore inevitable when making social choices about rising
sea level. Institutionalising processes that lead to fair and just outcomes is challenging, but vitally important.

Choices being made now about how to respond to SLR profoundly influence the trajectory of future exposure
and vulnerability to SLR. If concerted emissions mitigation is delayed, risks will progressively increase as SLR
accelerates. Prospects for global climate-resilience and sustainable development therefore depend in large part
on coastal nations, cities and communities taking urgent and sustained locally-appropriate action to mitigate
GHG emissions and adapt to SLR.

411
 

Chapter 4

References

Abadie, L.M., 2018: Sea level damage risk with probabilistic weighting of
IPCC scenarios: An application to major coastal cities. | Clean. Prod., 175,
582-598, doi:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.11.069.

Abadie, L.M., E. Sainz de Murieta and |. Galarraga, 2016: Climate risk
assessment under uncertainty: an application to main European coastal
cities. Front. Mar. Sci, 3, 265.

Ablain, M. et al., 2015: Improved sea level record over the satellite altimetry
era (1993-2010) from the Climate Change Initiative project. Ocean Sci,
11(1), 67-82.

Ablain, Michaél, et al, 2019: Uncertainty in satellite estimates of global
mean sea-level changes, trend and acceleration. Farth System Science
Data 11(3), 1189-1202.

Abrams, J.F et al, 2016: The impact of Indonesian peatland degradation
on downstream marine ecosystems and the global carbon cycle. Global
Change Biol, 22(1), 325-337, doi:10.1111/gcb.13108.

Absar, S.M. and B.L. Preston, 2015: Extending the Shared Socioeconomic
Pathways for sub-national impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability studies.
Global Environ. Chang. , 33, 83-96.

Adams, H., 2016: Why populations persist: mobility, place attachment and
climate change. Popul. Environ., 37(4), 429-448.

Adams, V.M., M. Mills, S. D. Jupiter and R. L. Pressey, 2011: Improving social
acceptability of marine protected area networks: A method for estimating
opportunity costs to multiple gear types in both fished and currently
unfished areas. Biol. Conserv., 144, 350-361.

Addo, K.A., 2015: Monitoring sea level rise-induced hazards along the coast
of Accra in Ghana. Nat. Hazards, 78(2), 1293-1307.

Adger, W.N., 2010: Social capital, collective action, and adaptation to
climate change. In: Der klimawande/ [Voss M. (eds.)]. VS Verlag flir
Sozialwissenschaften, pp. 327-345.

Adger, W.N. et al, 2015: Focus on environmental risks and migration: causes
and consequences. Environ. Res. Lett., 10(6), 1-6.

Adger, W.N., C. Butler and K. Walker-Springett, 2017: Moral reasoning in
adaptation to climate change. Environ. Politics, 26(3), 371-390.

Adger, W.N. et al., 2014: Human security. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change. [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, TE. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
Y.0. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea and L L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Adhikari, S. et al, 2014: Future Antarctic bed topography and its implications
for ice sheet dynamics. Solid Farth, 5, 569-584, doi:10.5194/se-5-569-2014.

Adloff, F. et al, 2018: Improving sea level simulation in Mediterranean
regional climate models. Clim. Dyn., 51(3), 1167-1178.

ADPC, 2005: Handbook on Design and Construction of Housing for
Flood-prone Rural Areas of Bangladesh. Asian Disaster Preparedness
Center [Available at www.adpc.net/igo/category/ID189/doc/2013-
p74Wob-ADPC-handbook_complete-b.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Aerts, J., 2018: A review of cost estimates for flood adaptation. Water,
10(11), 1646.

Aerts, J. et al., 2008: Aandacht voor veiligheid, leven met water, klimaat voor
ruimte, dg water. VU, Amsterdam, Amsterdam.

Aerts, J.C. et al, 2018a: Pathways to resilience: adapting to sea level rise in
Los Angeles. Ann. NY. Acad. Sci, 1427(1), 1-90.

Aerts, J.C.J.H., 2017: Climate-induced migration: Impacts beyond the coast.
Nat. Clim. Change. 7(5), 315-316.

Aerts, J.C.J.H. et al, 2018b: Integrating human behaviour dynamics into flood
disaster risk assessment. Nat. Clim. Change, 8(3), 193-199.

412

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Aerts, J.C..H. et al., 2014: Evaluating Flood Resilience Strategies for Coastal
Megacities. Science, 344, 473-475, doi:10.1126/science.1248222.

Ahas, R. et al, 2015: Everyday space-time geographies: using mobile
phone-based sensor data to monitor urban activity in Harbin, Paris, and
Tallinn. int. £ Geogr. Info. Sci., 29(11}, 2017-2039.

Ahmed, F. et al., 2018: Tipping points in adaptation to urban flooding under
climate change and urban growth: The case of the Dhaka megacity. Land
Use Policy, 79, 496-506.

Aitken, A.R.A. et al., 2016: Repeated large-scale retreat and advance of Totten
Glacier indicated by inland bed erosion. Nature, 533, 385, doi:10.1038/
nature17447.

Ajibade, |., M. Pelling, J. Agboola and M. Garschagen, 2016: Sustainability
transitions: exploring risk management and the future of adaptation in the
megacity of Lagos. Journal of Extreme Events, 3(03), 1650009.

Akerlof, K.L. et al., 2016: Risky business: Engaging the public on sea level
rise and inundation. Environ. Sci Policy, 66, 314-323, doi:10.1016/j.
envsci.2016.07.002.

Alam, K. and M. H. Rahman, 2014: Women in natural disasters: a case study
from southern coastal region of Bangladesh. int. £ Disast. Risk Reduc., 8,
68-82.

Albert, S. et al. 2018: Heading for the hills: climate-driven community
relocations in the Solomon Islands and Alaska provide insight for a 1.5 C
future. Reg. Environ. Change, 18(8), 2261-2272.

Albert, S. et al., 2016: Interactions between sea level rise and wave exposure
on reef island dynamics in the Solomon Islands. Environ. Res. Lett., 11(5),
054011.

Albert, S. et al., 2017: Winners and losers as mangrove, coral and seagrass
ecosystems respond to sea level rise in Solomon Islands. Environ. Res. Lett.,
12(9), 2-11.

Albright, R. et al, 2018: Carbon dioxide addition to coral reef waters
suppresses net community calcification. Nature, 555(7697), 516-519,
doi:10.1038/nature25968.

Aldrich, D.P., 2017: The importance of social capital in building community
resilience. In: Rethinking Resilience Adaptation and Transformation in a
Time of Change. Springer, Cham, 357-364.

Aldrich, D.P. and M. A. Meyer, 2015: Social capital and community resilience.
Am. Behav. Sci, 59(2), 254-269.

Alford, J. and B.W. Head, 2017: Wicked and less wicked problems: a typology
and a contingency framework. Policy and Society, 36(3), 397-413.

Allen, J.S., $.B. Longo and T.E. Shriver, 2018: Politics, the state, and sea
level rise: the treadmill of production and structural selectivity in North
Carolina's coastal resource commission. Sociol Q., 59(2), 320-337.

Allgood, L. and K.E. McNamara, 2017: Climate-induced migration: Exploring
local perspectives in Kiribati. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography,
38(3), 370-385.

Alston, M., 2013: Women and adaptation. WiRes. Clim. Change, 4(5), 351-358.

Amaro, V.E. et al., 2015: Multitemporal analysis of coastal erosion based on
multisource satellite images, Ponta Negra Beach, Natal City, Northeastern
Brazil. Marine Geodesy, 38(1), 1-25.

Amelung, B. and S. Nicholls, 2014: Implications of climate change for tourism
in Australia. Tourism Manage., 41, 228-244.

Amoako, C., 2016: Brutal presence or convenient absence: The role of the state
in the politics of flooding in informal Accra, Ghana. Geoforum, 77, 5-16.
Andersen, C.F., 2007: The New Orleans hurricane protection system: what
went wrong and why: A report. [American Society of Civil Engineers (eds.)].

Reston, Virginia, ISBN-13: 978-0-7844-0893-3.

Anguelovski, I. et al., 2016: Equity impacts of urban land use planning for
climate adaptation: Critical perspectives from the global north and south.
J Plan. Educ. Res., 36(3), 333-348.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Anthony, E. J. et al., 2015: Linking rapid erosion of the Mekong River delta to
human activities. Sci Rep., 5, 14745, doi:10.1038/srep14745.

Araos, M. et al., 2017: Climate change adaptation planning for Global South
megacities: the case of Dhaka. 4 Environ. Pol. Plan., 19 6), 682-696.

Arkema, K.K. et al., 2013: Coastal habitats shield people and property from
sea level rise and storms. Nat. Clim. Change, 3(10), 913.

Arkema, K.K. et al., 2015: Embedding ecosystem services in coastal planning
leads to better outcomes for people and nature. PNAS, 112(24), 7390-7395.

Arns, A. et al, 2017: Sea level rise induced amplification of coastal protection
design heights. Sci Rep., 7, 40171, doi:10.1038/srep40171.

Ars, A. et al, 2013: Estimating extreme water level probabilities:
A comparison of the direct methods and recommendations for best
practise. Coast. Eng. £, 81, 51-66.

Arnstein, S. R., 1969: A ladder of citizen participation. Journal of the American
Institute of planners, 35(4), 216-224.

Arthern, R. J. and C. R. Williams, 2017: The sensitivity of West Antarctica to
the submarine melting feedback. Geophys. Res. Lett., 44(5), 2352-2359.
Aschwanden, A. et al, 2019: Contribution of the Greenland Ice Sheet to sea

level over the next millennium. Sci Adv., 5, 1-11.

Aschwanden, A., M.A. Fahnestock and M. Truffer, 2016: Complex Greenland
outlet glacier flow captured. Nat. Commun., 7, 10524, doi:10.1038/
ncomms10524.

Ataie-Ashtiani, B. et al, 2013: How important is the impact of land-surface
inundation on seawater intrusion caused by sea level rise? Hydrogeol. J,
21(7), 1673-1677.

Auerbach, L. et al., 2015: Flood risk of natural and embanked landscapes on
the Ganges—Brahmaputra tidal delta plain. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(2), 153.
Austermann, J. and JX. Mitrovica, 2015: Calculating gravitationally
self-consistent sea level changes driven by dynamic topography. Geophys.

J. Int., 203(3), 1909-1922, doi:10.1093/gji/ggv371.

Austermann, J., J.X. Mitrovica, P. Huybers and A. Rovere, 2017: Detection of a
dynamic topography signal in last interglacial sea level records. Sci Adv.,
3(7), e1700457.

Badger, M.P.S., D.N. Schmidt, A. Mackensen and R. D. Pancost, 2013:
High-resolution alkenone palaeobarometry indicates relatively stable CO?
during the Pliocene (3.3-2.8 Ma). Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A., 371(2001),
1-16, doi:10.1098/rsta.201 3.0094.

Bailey, R.T., K. Barnes and C.D, Wallace, 2016: Predicting Future Groundwater
Resources of Coral Atoll Islands. Hydrol Process., 30(13), 2092-2105.

Bailey, R.T.,A. Khalil and V. Chatikavanij, 2014: Estimating transient freshwater
lens dynamics for atoll islands of the Maldives. 4 Hydrol, 515, 247-256.

Baker, S. and FS. Chapin Ill, 2018: Going beyond “it depends:” the role of
context in shaping participation in natural resource management. Ecol.
Soc., 23(1), 1-11.

Bakker, A.M., T.E. Wong, K.L. Ruckert and K. Keller, 2017: Sea level projections
representing the deeply uncertain contribution of the West Antarctic ice
sheet. Sci Rep., 7(1), 3880, doi:10.1038/s41598-01 7-04134-5.

Balaguru, K., G.R. Foltz, L.R. Leung and K.A. Emanuel, 2016: Global
warming-induced upper-ocean freshening and the intensification of super
typhoons. Nat. Commun., 7, 13670, doi:10.1038/ncommst 3670.

Balestri, E., F Vallerini and C. Lardicci, 2017: Recruitment and Patch
Establishment by Seed in the Seagrass Posidonia oceanica: Importance
and Conservation Implications. Front. Plant Sci., 8, 1067.

Ballu, V. et al, 2011: Comparing the role of absolute sea level rise and vertical
tectonic motions in coastal flooding, Torres Islands (Vanuatu). PNAS,
108(32), 13019-13022.

Balmford, A. et al., 2004: The worldwide costs of marine protected areas.
PNAS, 101(26}, 9694-9697.

Bamber, J. and W. Aspinall, 2013: An expert judgement assessment of future
sea level rise from the ice sheets. Nat. Clim. Change, 3(4), 424-427.

Bamber, J., W. Aspinall and R. Cooke, 2016: A commentary on “how to interpret
expert judgment assessments of twenty-first century sea level rise” by Hylke
de Vries and Roderik SW van de Wal. Clim. Change, 137(3—4), 321-328.

Chapter 4

Bamber, J.L. et al., 2019: Ice sheet contributions to future sea level rise from
structured expert judgment. PNAS, 116(23), 11195-11200.

Bamber, J.L, R.E. Riva, B.LA. Vermeersen and A.M. LeBrocg, 2009:
Reassessment of the potential sea level rise from a collapse of the
West Antarctic Ice Sheet. Science, 324(5929), 901-903, doi:10.1126/
science.1169335.

Bamber, J.L., R.M. Westaway, B. Marzeion and B. Wouters, 2018: The land
ice contribution to sea level during the satellite era. Environ. Res. Lett.
13(6}, 1-21.

Bandeira, S. and F. Gell, 2003: The seagrasses of Mozambique and
southeastern Africa. In: World Atlas of Seagrasses [Green, E. P. (ed.)], 93-
100, ISBN 0520240472.

Banwell, A.F,, D.R. MacAyeal and 0.V. Sergienko, 2013: Breakup of the Larsen
B Ice Shelf triggered by chain reaction drainage of supraglacial lakes.
Geophys. Res. Lett., 40(22), 5872-5876, doi:10.1002/2013GL057694.

Barbier, E.B., 2015: Hurricane Katrina’s lessons for the world. Nature,
524(7565), 285.

Barbier, E.B., 2016: The protective service of mangrove ecosystems: a review
of valuation methods. Mar. Polfut. Bull, 109(2), 676-681.

Barbier, E.B. and B.S. Enchelmeyer, 2014: Valuing the storm surge protection
service of US Gulf Coast wetlands. 4 Environ. Econ. Policy, 3, 167-185.
Barletta, V.R. et al., 2018: Observed rapid bedrock uplift in Amundsen Sea
Embayment promotes ice sheet stability. Science, 360(6395), 1335-1339,

doi: 10.1126/science.aao1447.

Barnard, P.L. et al, 2014: Development of the Coastal Storm Modeling System
(CoSMoS) for predicting the impact of storms on high-energy, active-margin
coasts. Nat. Hazards, 74(2), 1095-1125.

Barnett, J. et al, 2015: From barriers to limits to climate change adaptation:
path dependency and the speed of change. Ecol. Soc., 20(3), 1-11.

Barnett, J. et al., 2014:A local coastal adaptation pathway. Nat. Clim. Change,
4(12}, 1103-1108.

Barnhart, K., |. Overeem and R. Anderson, 201 4a: The effect of changing sea
ice on the physical vulnerability of Arctic coasts. The Cryosphere, 8(5),
1777-1799.

Barnhart, K.R. et al., 2014b: Modeling erosion of ice-rich permafrost bluffs
along the Alaskan Beaufort Sea coast. 4 Geophys. Res-Earth, 119(5),
1155-1179.

Barr, J.G. et al., 2013: Summertime influences of tidal energy advection on
the surface energy balance in a mangrove forest. Biogeosciences, 10,
501-511, doi:10.5194/bg-10-501-2013.

Barton, J.R., K. Krellenberg and J.M. Harris, 2015: Collaborative governance
and the challenges of participatory climate change adaptation planning in
Santiago de Chile. Clim. Dev., 7(2), 175-184.

Bassis, J. and C. Walker, 2012: Upper and lower limits on the stability of
calving glaciers from the yield strength envelope of ice. Proc. Royal Soc.
Lond, A., 468(2140), 913-931.

Bassis, J.N., 2011: The statistical physics of iceberg calving and the
emergence of universal calving laws. 4 Glaciol, 57(201), 3-16,
doi: 10.3189/00221431 1795306745.

Batabyal, P. et al, 2016: Environmental drivers on seasonal abundance of
riverine-estuarine V. cholerae in the Indian Sundarban mangrove. Ecol
Indic., 69, 59-65.

Bayraktarov, E. et al., 2016: The cost and feasibility of marine coastal
restoration. Ecol Appl, 26, 1055-1074.

Beck, M.W. and G.M. Lange, 2016: Managing Coasts with Natural Solutions:
Guidelines for Measuring and Valuing the Coastal Protection Services of
Mangroves and Coral Reefs, The World Bank, Washington, DC, 166-pp.

Beck, M.W. et al., 2018: The global flood protection savings provided by coral
reefs. Nat. Commun., 9(1), 2186.

Becker, M., M. Karpytchev and S. Lennartz-Sassinek, 2014: Long-term sea level
trends: Natural or anthropogenic? Geophys. Res. Lett., 41(15), 5571-5580.

Becker, M. et al, 2016: Do climate models reproduce complexity of observed
sea level changes? Geophys. Res. Lett., 43(10), 5176-5184.

413

 
 

Chapter 4

Becker, M. et al., 2012: Sea level variations at tropical Pacific islands since
1950. Global Planet. Change, 80, 85-98.

Beckley, B. et al, 2017: On the “Cal-Mode” Correction to TOPEX Satellite
Altimetry and Its Effect on the Global Mean Sea Level Time Series. Journal
of Geophysical Research: Oceans, 122(11), 8371-8384.

Beetham, E., PS. Kench and S. Popinet, 2017: Future Reef Growth Can
Mitigate Physical Impacts of Sea-Level Rise on Atoll Islands. Earth’s Future,
5(10}, 1002-1014.

Beichler, $.A., 2015: Exploring the link between supply and demand of cultural
ecosystem services-towards an integrated vulnerability assessment.
International Journal of Biodiversity Science, Ecosystem Services &
Management, 11(3), 250-263.

Bell, R. et al, 201 7a: Coastal Hazards and Climate Change: Guidance for Local
Government. Ministry for the Environment, New Zealand [Available at:
www.mfe.govt.nz/sites/default/files/media/Climate%20Change/coastal-
hazards-guide-final.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Bell, R.E. et al., 2017b: Antarctic ice shelf potentially stabilized by export of
meltwater in surface river. Nature, 544 (7650), 344-348.

Bell, T., 2016: Turning Research Inside Out: Labrador Inuit focus on research
priorities that strengthen community sustainability and well-being.
Newfoundland Quarterly, 109(1}, 37-41.

Bellinson, R. and E. Chu, 2019: Learning pathways and the governance of
innovations in urban climate change resilience and adaptation. { Environ.
Pol Plan., 21 (1), 76-89.

Ben-Haim, Y., 2006: Info-gap decision theory: decisions under severe
uncertainty. Academic Press, Oxford, ISBN-13 978-0-12-373552-2, 361-pp.

Ben-Tal, A., L. El Ghaoui and A. Nemirovski, 2009: Robust optimization.
Princeton University Press, 28, ISBN 978-0-691-1 4368-2.

Benham, C.F, S.G. Beavis, R.A. Hendry and E.L. Jackson, 2016: Growth
effects of shading and sedimentation in two tropical seagrass species:
Implications for port management and impact assessment. Mar. Pollut.
Bull, 109(1), 461-470, doi:10.1016/. MARPOLBUL.2016.05.027.

Benn, D.I., C.R. Warren and R.H. Mottram, 2007: Calving processes and the
dynamics of calving glaciers. Earth-Sci. Rev., 82(3), 143-179, doi:10.1016/j.
earscirev.2007.02.002.

Bennett, N.J., J. Blythe, S. Tyler and N.C. Ban, 2016: Communities and change
in the anthropocene: understanding social-ecological vulnerability and
planning adaptations to multiple interacting exposures. Reg. Environ.
Change, 16(4), 907-926.

Bercovitch, J., V. Kremenyuk and I. W. Zartman, 2008: The SAGE handbook of
conflict resolution. Sage, Great Britain, Cromwell Press Ltd, ISBN 978-1-
4129-2192-3.

Berke, P.R. and M.R. Stevens, 2016: Land use planning for climate adaptation:
Theory and practice. J Plan. Educ. Res., 36(3), 283-289.

Berquist, M., A. Daniere and L. Drummond, 2015: Planning for global
environmental change in Bangkok's informal settlements. 4 Environ. Plan.
Manage., 58(10), 1711-1730.

Bertram, R.A. et al, 2018: Pliocene deglacial event timelines and the
biogeochemical response offshore Wilkes Subglacial Basin, East Antarctica.
Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 494, 109-116, doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2018.04.054.

Bettini, G. and G. Gioli, 2016: Waltz with development: insights on the
developmentalization of climate-induced migration. Migration and
Development, 5(2), 171-189.

Betzold, C. and |. Mohamed, 2017: Seawalls as a response to coastal erosion
and flooding: a case study from Grande Comore, Comoros (West Indian
Ocean). Reg. Environ. Change, 17(4), 1077-1087.

Bevis, M. et al, 2019: Accelerating changes in ice mass within Greenland,
and the ice sheet’s sensitivity to atmospheric forcing. PNAS, 116(6}, 1934—
1939, doi:10.1073/pnas. 1806562116.

Bhatia, K. et al, 2018: Projected response of tropical cyclone intensity and
intensification in a global climate model. £ Clim., 31(20), 8281-8303.

414

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Bhuiyan, M.J.A.N. and D. Dutta, 2012: Assessing impacts of sea level rise on
river salinity in the Gorai river network, Bangladesh. Estuar. Coast. Shelf
Sci, 96, 219-227.

Biesbroek, G.R., J.E. Klostermann, C.J. Termeer and P. Kabat, 2013: On the
nature of barriers to climate change adaptation. Reg. Environ. Change,
13(5), 1119-1129.

Biesbroek, G.R., C.J. Termeer, J.E. Klostermann and P. Kabat, 2014: Rethinking
barriers to adaptation: Mechanism-based explanation of impasses in the
governance of an innovative adaptation measure. Global Environ. Chang.,
26, 108-118.

Biesbroek, R. et al, 2015: Opening up the black box of adaptation
decision-making. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(6), 493.

Biesbroek, R., J. Dupuis and A. Wellstead, 2017: Explaining through causal
mechanisms: resilience and governance of social-ecological systems. Curr.
Opin. Environ. Sustain., 28, 64-70.

Bilbao, R.A., J.M. Gregory and N. Bouttes, 2015: Analysis of the regional
pattern of sea level change due to ocean dynamics and density change for
1993-2099 in observations and CMIP5 AOGCMs. Clim. Dyn., 45 (9-10),
2647-2666.

Bilkovic, D., Mitchell, M., Peyre, M. La, Toft, J., 2017: Living shorelines: the
science and management of nature-based coastal protection. CRC Press,
Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1-498, ISBN 13: 978-1-4987-4002-9.

Binder, S.B., J.P. Barile, C.K. Baker and B. Kulp, 2019: Home buyouts and
household recovery: neighborhood differences three years after Hurricane
Sandy. Environ. Hazards, 18(2), 127-145.

Bindoff, N.L. et al, 2013: Detection and Attribution of Climate Change:
from Global to Regional. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group | to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. [Stocker, T.F, D. Qin,
G.K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex
and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 867-952.

Bindoff, N.L. et al, 2007: Observations: Oceanic Climate Change and Sea
Level. In: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group | to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen,
M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,
385-432.

Bindschadler, R.A. et al., 2013: Ice sheet model sensitivities to environmental
forcing and their use in projecting future sea level (the SeaRISE project).
JL Glaciol , 59(214), 195-224.

Bisaro, A. and J. Hinkel, 2016: Governance of social dilemmas in climate
change adaptation. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(4), 354-359.

Bisaro, A. and J. Hinkel, 2018: Mobilizing private finance for coastal adaptation:
A literature review. WiRes. Clim. Change, 9(3), e514.

Bisaro, A., M. Roggero and S. Villamayor-Tomas, 2018: Institutional analysis in
climate change adaptation research: A systematic literature review. Ecol.
Econ., 151, 34-43.

Biswas, S., M.A. Hasan and M.S. Inslam, 2015: Stilt Housing Technology for
Flood Disaster Reduction in the Rural Areas of Bangladesh. int. 4 Res. Civ.
Eng., 3, 1-6.

Bjork, A.A. et al, 2012: An aerial view of 80 years of climate-related glacier
fluctuations in southeast Greenland. Nat. Geosci., 5(6), 427-432.

Bjork, M., F.T. Short, E. Mcleod and S. Beer, 2008: Managing Seagrasses for
Resilience to Climate Change. \UCN Global Marine Programme, Gland,
Switzerland, 1-55, ISBN 978-2-8317-1089-1.

Black, R. et al., 2011: The effect of environmental change on human migration.
Global Environ. Chang., 21, $3-S11.

Black, R. et al., 2013: Migration, immobility and displacement outcomes
following extreme events. Environ. Sci. Policy, 27, $32-S43.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Blazquez, A. et al, 2018: Exploring the uncertainty in GRACE estimates of the
mass redistributions at the Earth surface: implications for the global water
and sea level budgets. Geophys. J. int., 215(1), 415-430.

Bloemen, P. et al, 2018: Lessons learned from applying adaptation pathways
in flood risk management and challenges for the further development of
this approach. Mitig. Adapt. Strat. Gi, 23(7), 1083-1108.

Bloemen, P., M. Van Der Steen and Z. Van Der Wal, 2019: Designing a century
ahead: Climate change adaptation in the Dutch Delta. Policy and Society,
38 (1), 58-76.

Bloetscher, F., B. Heimlich and D. E. Meeroff, 2011: Development of an
adaptation toolbox to protect southeast Florida water supplies from
climate change. Environ. Rev., 19, 397-417.

Blok, A. and R. Tschétschel, 2016: World port cities as cosmopolitan risk
community: Mapping urban climate policy experiments in Europe and East
Asia. Environ. Plan. C., 34(4), 717-736.

Bléschl, G. et al., 2017: Changing climate shifts timing of European floods.
Science, 357(6351), 588-590.

Boening, C. et al, 2012: The 2011 La Nifia: So strong, the oceans fell. Geophys.
Res, Lett., 39 (19), 1-5, doi:10.1029/2012GL053055.

Bohra-Mishra, P., M. Oppenheimer and S.M. Hsiang, 2014: Nonlinear
permanent migration response to climatic variations but minimal response
to disasters. PNAS, 111(27), 9780-9785.

Borges, A. et al, 2009: Convenient solutions to an inconvenient truth:
Ecosystem-based approaches to climate change.

Bouttes, N., J. Gregory, T. Kuhlbrodt and R.J.C.D. Smith, 2014: The drivers of
projected North Atlantic sea level change. 43 (5-6), 1531-1544.

Boyer, T. et al, 2016: Sensitivity of global upper-ocean heat content estimates
to mapping methods, XBT bias corrections, and baseline climatologies.
J Clim., 29(13), 4817-4842.

Brakenridge, G. et al., 2017: Design with nature: Causation and avoidance of
catastrophic flooding, Myanmar. Farth-Sci. Rev., 165, 81-109.

Breininger, D.R., R.D. Breininger and C.R. Hall, 2017: Effects of surrounding
land use and water depth on seagrass dynamics relative to a catastrophic
algal bloom. Conserv. Biol, 31(1), 67-75.

Brekelmans, R., Hertog, D. den, Roos, K., Eijgenraam, C., 2012: Safe Dike
Heights at Minimal Costs: The Nonhomogeneous Case. Oper. Res., 60,
1342-1355, doi:10.1287/opre.1110.1028.

Bridges, K.W. and W.C. McClatchey, 2009: Living on the margin:
ethnoecological insights from Marshall Islanders at Rongelap atoll. Global
Environ. Chang., 19(2), 140-146.

Bridges, T., J. Simm, N. Pontee and J. Guy, 2018: International guidance on use
of natural and nature-based features in flood and coastal management.
[Available at:https://ewn.el.erdc.dren.mil/nnbf-guidelines.html.] Accessed:
2019/09/20.

Bridges, T., Wagner, PW., Burks-Copes, K.A., Bates, M.E., Collier, Z.A.,
Fischenich, C.J., Gailani, J.Z., Leuck, L.D., Piercy, C.D., Rosati, J.D., Russo, E.J.,
Shafer, D.J., Suedel, B.C., Vuxton, E.A., Wamsley, T. V., 2015: Use of Natural
and Nature-Based Features (NNBF) for Coastal Resilience, North Atlantic
Coast Comprehensive Study: Resilient Adaptation to Increasing Risk. US
Army Corps of Engineers: Engineer Research and Development Center,
Vicksburg, MS, USA, 412-pp.

Briggs, R., D. Pollard and L. Tarasov, 2013: A glacial systems model configured
for large ensemble analysis of Antarctic deglaciation. The Cryosphere, 7(6),
1949-1970.

Brink, E. and C. Wamsler, 2019: Citizen engagement in climate adaptation
surveyed: The role of values, worldviews, gender and place. / Clean. Prod.,
209, 1342-1353.

Brinke, T. et al, 2010: Contingency planning for large-scale floods in the
Netherlands. . Contingencies Crisis Manage., 18 (1), 55-69.

Brondex, J., 0. Gagliardini, F. Gillet-Chaulet and G. Durand, 2017: Sensitivity
of grounding line dynamics to the choice of the friction law. 4 Glaciol,
63(241), 854-866, doi:10.1017/jog.2017.51.

Chapter 4

Bronen, R. and F. S. Chapin, 2013: Adaptive governance and institutional
strategies for climate-induced community relocations in Alaska. PNAS,
110(23), 9320-9325.

Bronselaer, B. et al, 2018: Change in future climate due to Antarctic meltwater.
Nature, 564(7734), 53-58, doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0712-z.

Broto, V.C., E. Boyd and J. Ensor, 2015: Participatory urban planning for
climate change adaptation in coastal cities: lessons from a pilot experience
in Maputo, Mozambique. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain., 13, 11-18.

Brown, C.J., M.I. Saunders, H.P. Possingham and A.J. Richardson, 2013:
Managing for Interactions between Local and Global Stressors of
Ecosystems. PLoS One, 8(6), 1-10, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0065765.

Brown, I., J. Martin-Ortega, K. Waylen and K. Blackstock, 2016: Participatory
scenario planning for developing innovation in community adaptation
responses: three contrasting examples from Latin America. Reg. Environ.
Change, 16(6), 1685-1700.

Brown, S. and R. Nicholls, 2015: Subsidence and human influences in mega
deltas: the case of the Ganges—Brahmaputra—Meghna. Sci. Total Environ.,
527, 362-374.

Brown, S. et al., 2018a: Quantifying Land and People Exposed to Sea-Level
Rise with No Mitigation and 1.5 and 2.0°C Rise in Global Temperatures to
Year 2300. Farth’s Future, 6(3), 583-600.

Brown, S. et al. 2014: Shifting perspectives on coastal impacts and adaptation.
Nat. Clim. Change, 4(9), 752-755.

Brown, S. et al, 2018b:What are the implications of sea level rise for a 1.5, 2 and
3°C rise in global mean temperatures in the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna
and other vulnerable deltas? Reg. Environ. Change, 18(6), 1829-1842.

Buchanan, M.K., R.E. Kopp, M. Oppenheimer and C. Tebaldi, 2016: Allowances
for evolving coastal flood risk under uncertain local sea level rise. Clim.
Change, 137(3-4), 347-362.

Buchanan, M.K., M. Oppenheimer and R.E. Kopp, 2017: Amplification of flood
frequencies with local sea level rise and emerging flood regimes. Environ.
Res, Lett., 12(6}, 064009.

Buchanan, M.K., M. Oppenheimer and A. Parris, 2019: Values, bias, and
stressors affect intentions to adapt to coastal flood risk: a case study from
NYC. Weather, Climate, and Society, 11(4), 809-821.

Buchori, |. et al, 2018: Adaptation to coastal flooding and inundation:
Mitigations and migration pattern in Semarang City, Indonesia. Ocean
Coast. Manage, 163, 445-455.

Bucx, T., M. Marchand, B. Makaske and C. van de Guchte, 2010: Comparative
assessment of the vulnerability and resilience of 10 deltas: work document
(No.1), 177, Deltares, Netherlands, ISBN 9789490070397.

Bucx, T., C. van Ruiten, G. Erkens and G. de Lange, 2015: An integrated
assessment framework for land subsidence in delta cities. Proc. Int. Assoc.
Hydrology. Sci., 372, 485.

Buhr, B. et al, 2018: Climate Change and the Cost of Capital in Developing
Countries. UN Environment, UNEP Inquiry, Imperial College Business School
Center for Climate Finance and Investment and SOAS [Available at: http://
unepinquiry.org/wp-content/uploads/201 8/07/Climate_Change_and_the_
Cost_of_Capital_in_Developing_Countries. pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Bujosa, A. and J. Rossellé, 2013: Climate change and summer mass tourism:
the case of Spanish domestic tourism. Clim. Change, 117(1-2), 363-375.

Bukvic, A. and G. Owen, 2017: Attitudes towards relocation following Hurricane
Sandy: should we stay or should we go? Disasters, 41(1), 101-123.

Bulthuis, K., M.Arnst, S. Sun and F. Pattyn, 2019: Uncertainty quantification of
the multi-centennial response of the Antarctic ice sheet to climate change.
The Cryosphere, 13, 1349-1380.

Burby, R.J., 2006: Hurricane Katrina and the paradoxes of government
disaster policy: Bringing about wise governmental decisions for hazardous
areas. Ann. Am. Acad. Political. Soc. Sci, 604(1), 171-191.

Burch, S., A. Shaw, A. Dale and J. Robinson, 2014: Triggering transformative
change: a development path approach to climate change response in
communities. Clim. Policy, 14(4), 467-487.

415

 
 

Chapter 4

Burcharth, H.F., T.L. Andersen and J.L. Lara, 2014: Upgrade of coastal defence
structures against increased loadings caused by climate change: A first
methodological approach. Coast. Eng. , 87, 112-121.

Burdick, D. M. and C. T. Roman (eds.), 2012: Salt marsh responses to tidal
restriction and restoration. In: Tidal marsh restoration. Springer, pp. 373-382.

Burge, C.A. et al, 2014: Climate change influences on marine infectious
diseases: implications for management and society, Annual review of
marine science, 6, 249-277.

Burge, C.A., C.J. Kim, J.M. Lyles and C.D. Harvell, 2013: Special issue oceans
and humans health: the ecology of marine opportunists. Microb. Ecol,
65(4), 869-879.

Burke, L., K. Reytar, M. Spalding, A. Perry, 2011: Reefs at Risk Revisited. World
Resources Institute, Washington, DC, 130-pp.

Burson, B. and R. Bedford, 2015: Facilitating voluntary adaptive migration in
the Pacific. Forced Migration Review, (49), 54.

Burton, P. and J. Mustelin, 2013: Planning for climate change: is greater public
participation the key to success? Urban Policy Res., 31(4), 399-415.

Busch, S.V., 2018: Sea Level Rise and Shifting Maritime Limits: Stable Baselines
as a Response to Unstable Coastlines. Arctic Rev., 9, 174-194.

Butler, J. et al, 2016a: Scenario planning to leap-frog the Sustainable
Development Goals: an adaptation pathways approach. Clim. Risk
Manage., 12, 83-99.

Butler, J. et al, 2014: Framing the application of adaptation pathways for
rural livelihoods and global change in eastern Indonesian islands. Global
Environ. Chang., 28, 368-382.

Butler, W.H., R.E. Deyle and C. Mutnansky, 2016b: Low-regrets incrementalism:
Land use planning adaptation to accelerating sea level rise in Florida's
Coastal Communities. 4 Plan. Educ. Res., 36(3), 319-332.

Buurman, J. and V. Babovic, 2016: Adaptation Pathways and Real Options
Analysis: An approach to deep uncertainty in climate change adaptation
policies. Policy and Society, 35(2), 137150.

Byrne, J.P, 2012: The cathedral engulfed: Sea level rise, property rights, and
time. La. L. Rev., 73, 69.

Cai, R., H. Tan and H. Kontoyiannis, 2017: Robust Surface Warming in Offshore
China Seas and Its Relationship to the East Asian Monsoon Wind Field and
Ocean Forcing on Interdecadal Time Scales. . Clim., 30(22), 8987-9005.

Cai, R., H. Tan and Q. Qi, 2016: Impacts of and adaptation to inter-decadal
marine climate change in coastal China seas. Int. £ Climatol, 36(11),
3770-3780, doi:10.1002/joc.4591.

Calil, J. et al, 2017: Comparative Coastal Risk Index (CCRI):A multidisciplinary
risk index for Latin America and the Caribbean. PloS One, 12(11),
e0187011.

Call, M.A., C. Gray, M. Yunus and M. Emch, 2017: Disruption, not displacement:
environmental variability and temporary migration in Bangladesh. Global
Environ. Chang., 46, 157-165.

Callahan, K., 2007: Citizen participation: Models and methods. Int. 4 Public
Admin. , 30(11), 1179-1196.

Calovy, R. et al., 2018: Simulation of the future sea level contribution of Greenland
with a new glacial system model. The Cryosphere, 12, 3097-3121.

Camargo, S.J, 2013: Global and regional aspects of tropical cyclone
activity in the CMIP5 models. { Clim., 26(24), 9880-9902, doi:10.1175/
JCLI-D-12-00549.1.

Campbell, J.E. and J.W. Fourqurean, 2014: Ocean acidification outweighs
nutrient effects in structuring seagrass epiphyte communities. 4 Fcol,
102(3), 730-737, doi:10.1111/1365-2745.12233.

Campbell, J.R., 2015: Development, global change and traditional food security
in Pacific Island countries. Reg. Environ. Change, 15(7), 1313-1324.

Campbell, S.J. and LJ. McKenzie, 2004: Flood related loss and recovery of
intertidal seagrass meadows in southern Queensland, Australia. Estuar
Coast. Shelf Sci, 60(3), 477-490.

Capron, E. et al, 2014: Temporal and spatial structure of multi-millennial
temperature changes at high latitudes during the Last Interglacial. Quat.
Sci. Rev., 103, 116-133.

416

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Carlsson Kanyama, A., P. Wikman-Svahn and K. Mossberg Sonnek, 2019:
“We want to know where the line is”: comparing current planning for
future sea level rise with three core principles of robust decision support
approaches. J. Environ. Plan. Manage., 62(8), 1339-1358.

Carlton, SJ. and SK. Jacobson, 2013: Climate change and coastal
environmental risk perceptions in Florida. 4 Environ. Manage., 130, 32-39.

Carr, L. and R. Mendelsohn, 2003: Valuing Coral Reefs: A Travel Cost Analysis
of the Great Barrier Reef. AMB/O, 32, 353-357.

Carrasquilla-Henao, M. and F. Juanes, 2017: Mangroves enhance local
fisheries catches: a global meta-analysis. Fish Fish., 18, 79-93.

Carson, M. et al, 2017: Regional Sea Level Variability and Trends, 1960-
2007: A Comparison of Sea Level Reconstructions and Ocean Syntheses.
J Geophys. Res-Oceans, 122(11), 9068-9091.

Carson, M. et al., 2016: Coastal sea level changes, observed and projected
during the 20th and 21st century. Clim. Change, 134 (1-2), 269-281.

Carter, L., 2018: Indigenous Pacific Approaches to Climate Change: Aotearoa/
New Zealand, 1-103, Springer, Cham, Switzerland, ISBN 978-3-319-96438-6.

Cashman, A. and M.R. Nagdee, 2017: Impacts of climate change on
settlements and infrastructure in the coastal and marine environments of
Caribbean small island developing states (SIDS). Sci. Rev., 2017, 155-173.

Castrucci, L. and N. J. M. T. S.J. Tahvildari, 2018: Modeling the Impacts of
Sea Level Rise on Storm Surge Inundation in Flood-Prone Urban Areas
of Hampton Roads, Virginia. 52(2), 92-105.

Cazenave, A. and G.L. Cozannet, 2014: Sea level rise and its coastal impacts.
Earth's Future, 2(2), 15-34.

Cazenave, A. et al., 2012: Estimating ENSO influence on the global mean sea
level, 1993-2010. Marine Geodesy, 35 (sup1), 82-97.

Celliers, L., S. Rosendo, |. Coetzee and G. Daniels, 201 3: Pathways of integrated
coastal management from national policy to local implementation:
Enabling climate change adaptation. Mar. Policy, 39, 72-86.

Chadenas, C., A. Creach and D. Mercier, 2014: The impact of storm Xynthia
in 2010 on coastal flood prevention policy in France. 4 Coast. Conserv,
18(5), 529-538.

Chaffin, B. C. et al, 2016: Transformative environmental governance. Annu.
Rev. Environ. Resourc., 41, 399-423.

Chambers, D. P. et al, 2017: Evaluation of the global mean sea level budget
between 1993 and 2014. Surv. Geophys., 38(1), 309-327.

Chambwera, M. et al, 2014: Economics of adaptation. In: Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change. [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
Y.0. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
PR. Mastrandrea and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Chan, F. et al, 2018: Towards resilient flood risk management for Asian
coastal cities: Lessons learned from Hong Kong and Singapore. J. Clean.
Prod., 187, 576-589.

Chandra, A. and P. Gaganis, 2016: Deconstructing vulnerability and adaptation
in a coastal river basin ecosystem: a participatory analysis of flood risk in
Nadi, Fiji Islands. Clim. Dev., 8(3), 256-269.

Chang, E.K.M., 2014: Impacts of background field removal on CMIP5 projected
changes in Pacific winter cyclone activity. Geophys. Res-Atmos., 119(8),
4626-4639.

Chao, B.F, Y. Wu and Y. Li, 2008: Impact of artificial reservoir water
impoundment on global sea level. Science, 320(5873), 212-214.

Chauché, N. et al., 2014: Ice-ocean interaction and calving front morphology
at two west Greenland tidewater outlet glaciers. The Cryosphere, 8(4),
145-1468, doi:10.5194/tc-8-1 457-2014.

Chee, S.Y. et al, 2017: Land reclamation and artificial islands: Walking the
tightrope between development and conservation. Globa/ Ecol, Conserv.,
12, 80-95, doi:10.1016/j.gecco.2017.08.005.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Chefaoui, R.M., C.M. Duarte and E.A. Serrao, 2018: Dramatic loss of seagrass
habitat under projected climate change in the Mediterranean Sea. Global
Change Biol., 24(10), 4919-4928.

Chen, J., C. Wilson and B. Tapley, 201 3: Contribution of ice sheet and mountain
glacier melt to recent sea level rise. Nat. Geosci., 6(7), 549-552.

Chen, X. et al., 2017: The increasing rate of global mean sea level rise during
1993-2014. Nat. Clim. Change, 7(7), 492-495.

Cheng, H. et al, 2018: Mapping Sea Level Rise Behavior in an Estuarine Delta
System: A Case Study along the Shanghai Coast. Engineering, 4(1), 156-163.

Cheng, L., J. Abraham, Z. Hausfather and K.E.J.S. Trenberth, 2019: How fast are
the oceans warming? 363(6423), 128-129.

Cheng, L. et al, 2017: Improved estimates of ocean heat content from 1960
to 2015. Sci Adv, 3(3), 1-10, doi:10.1126/sciadv.1601545.

Cheng, L. et al., 2016: Observed and simulated full-depth ocean heat-content
changes for 1970-2005. Ocean Sci, 12, 925-935.

Cheong, S.-M. et al., 2013: Coastal adaptation with ecological engineering.
Nature Clim. Change, 3, 787-791.

Chhetri, N., M. StuhImacher and A. Ishtiaque, 2019: Nested pathways to
adaptation. Environ. Res. Commun., 1(1), 015001.

Chouinard, O. et al, 2017: The Participative Action Research Approach to
Climate Change Adaptation in Atlantic.

Canadian Coastal Communities. In: Climate Change Adaptation in North
America. Springer, 67-87, ISBN 978-3-319-53741-2.

Chouinard, 0., S.Weissenberger and D. Lane, 2015:L'adaptation au changement
climatique en zone cétiére selon l'approche communautaire: études de
cas de projets de recherche-action participative au Nouveau-Brunswick
(Canada). VertigO-la revue électronique en sciences de |’environnement,
(Hors-série 23).

Christensen, J.H. et al, 2013: Climate Phenomena and their Relevance for Future
Regional Climate Change. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science
Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Stocker, TF, D. Qin, G.K. Plattner,
M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley
(eds.)], Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Chu, E., 2016a: The political economy of urban climate adaptation and
development planning in Surat, India. Environ. Plan. C., 34(2), 281-298.
Chu, E., |. Anguelovski and J. Carmin, 2016: Inclusive approaches to urban
climate adaptation planning and implementation in the Global South.

Clim. Policy, 16(3), 372-392.

Chu, E.K., 2016b: The governance of climate change adaptation through
urban policy experiments. Environ. Policy Governance, 26(6), 439-451.
Chu, E.K., §. Hughes and S.G. Mason (eds.), 2018: Conclusion: Multilevel
Governance and Climate Change Innovations in Cities. In: Climate Change

in Cities. Springer, Cham, pp. 361-378, ISBN 978-3-319-65003-6.

Chung, C.-H., 2006: Forty years of ecological engineering with Spartina
plantations in China. Ecol Eng., 27, 49-57.

Church, JA. et al, 2013: Sea Level Change. In: Climate Change 2013: The
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group | to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
[Stocker, T.F, D. Qin, G.K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung,
A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Church, J.A. and N.J. White, 2011: Sea level rise from the late 19th to the early
21st century. Surv. Geophys., 32(4-5), 585-602.

Cid, A. et al, 2017: Global reconstructed daily surge levels from the 20th
Century Reanalysis (1871-2010). Global Planet. Change, 148, 9-21.

Cipollini, P. et al., 2017: Monitoring sea level in the coastal zone with satellite
altimetry and tide gauges. Surv. Geophys., 38(1), 33-57.

CIRIA, 2007: The Rock Manual: The Use of Rock for Hydraulic Engineering.
C683, CIRIA, CUR and CETMEF, London.

Clar, C., 2019: Coordinating climate change adaptation across levels of
government: the gap between theory and practice of integrated adaptation
strategy processes. J Environ. Plan. Manage., 61(11), 1-20.

Chapter 4

Clar, C. and R. Steurer, 2019: Climate change adaptation at different levels
of government: Characteristics and conditions of policy change. Natural
Resources Forum, 43(2), 121-131.

Clark, P.U. et al., 2018: Sea level commitment as a gauge for climate policy.
Nat. Clim. Change, 8(8), 653-655.

Clark, PU. et al, 2016: Consequences of twenty-first-century policy for
multi-millennial climate and sea level change. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(4),
360-369, doi:10.1038/nclimate2923.

Clarke, D., A.N. Lazar, ARM. Saleh and M. Jahiruddin, 2018: Prospects for
Agriculture Under Climate Change and Soil Salinisation. In: Ecosystem
Services for Well-Being in Deltas. Springer, pp. 447-467.

Cloutier, G. et al., 2015: Planning adaptation based on local actors’ knowledge
and participation: A climate governance experiment. Clim. Policy, 15(4),
458-474,

Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority of Louisiana, 2017: Louisiana's
Comprehensive Master Plan for a Sustainable Coast. Coastal Protection
and Restoration Authority of Louisiana, Louisiana, USA.

Coen, L.D. et al, 2007: Ecosystem services related to oyster restoration. Mar.
Ecol. Prog. Ser., 341, 303-307.

Cogley, J.G., 2009: Geodetic and direct mass-balance measurements:
comparison and joint analysis. Ann. Glaciol, 50(50), 96-100.

Colbert, A.J., B.J. Soden, G.A. Vecchi and B.P. Kirtman, 2013: The impact of
anthropogenic climate change on North Atlantic tropical cyclone tracks.
L Clim., 26(12}, 4088-4095.

Coldren, G.A., J.A. Langley, I.C. Feller and S.K. Chapman, 2019: Warming
accelerates mangrove expansion and surface elevation gain in a
subtropical wetland. 4 Ecol, 107(1), 79-90.

Colenbrander, D., 2019: Dissonant discourses: revealing South Africa's
policy-to-praxis challenges in the governance of coastal risk and
vulnerability. 4 Environ. Plan. Manage., 62(10), 1-20.

Colenbrander, D. and M. Bavinck, 2017: Exploring the role of bureaucracy
in the production of coastal risks, City of Cape Town, South Africa. Ocean
Coast. Manage, 150, 35-50.

Colenbrander, D., A. Cartwright and A. Taylor, 2016: Drawing a line in the sand:
managing coastal risks in the City Of Cape Town, South African Geographical
Journal 97(1), 1-17. South African Geographical Journal 98(1), 104.

Colenbrander, D.R. and M.R. Sowman, 2015: Merging Socioeconomic
Imperatives with Geospatial Data: A Non-Negotiable for Coastal Risk
Management in South Africa. Coastal Manage., 43(3), 270-300.

Colgan, CS., MW. Beck and S. Narayan, 2017: Financing Natural
Infrastructure for Coastal Flood Damage Reduction. Lloyd's Tercentenary
Research Foundation, London.

Colle, B.A. et al., 2013: Historical evaluation and future prediction of eastern
North American and western Atlantic extratropical cyclones in the CMIP5
models during the cool season. J. Clim., 26(18), 6882-6903.

Collins, N., S. Jones, TH. Nguyen and P. Stanton, 2017: The contribution of
human capital to a holistic response to climate change: learning from and for
the Mekong Delta, Vietnam. Asia Pacific Business Review, 23(2), 230-242.

Conlisk, E. et al., 2013: Uncertainty in assessing the impacts of global change
with coupled dynamic species distribution and population models. Globa/
Change Biol, 19(3), 858-869, doi:10.1111/gcb.12090.

Connell, J., 2012: Population Resettlement in the Pacific: lessons from
a hazardous history? Austral. Geogr. 43(2), 127-142.

Connell, S.D. et al, 2017: Testing for thresholds of ecosystem collapse in
seagrass meadows. Conserv. Biol, 31(5), 1196-1201, doi:10.1111/
cobi.12951.

Conrad, J.M., 1980: Quasi-option value and the expected value of information.
Quart. | Econ., 94(4), 813-820.

Cook, C.P. et al, 2013: Dynamic behaviour of the East Antarctic ice sheet during
Pliocene warmth. Nat. Geosci., 6(9), 765-769, doi:10.1038/ngeo1 889.

Cooke, B.C., A.R. Jones, ID. Goodwin and M.J. Bishop, 2012: Nourishment
practices on Australian sandy beaches: a review. J Environ. Manage., 113,
319-327.

417

 
 

Chapter 4

Cooke, R., 1991: Experts in uncertainty: opinion and subjective probability in
science. Oxford University Press on Demand, New York, NY, USA, 319-pp.,
ISBN 0-19-506465-8.

Coombes, M.A., E.C. La Marca, L.A. Naylor and R.C. Thompson, 2015: Getting
into the groove: opportunities to enhance the ecological value of hard
coastal infrastructure using fine-scale surface textures. Ecol Eng., 77,
314-323.

Cooper, J., M. O’Connor and S. Mclvor, 2016: Coastal defences versus coastal
ecosystems: a regional appraisal. Mar. Policy.

Cornford, $.L. et al, 2015: Century-scale simulations of the response of the
West Antarctic Ice Sheet to a warming climate. The Cryosphere, 9(4),
1579-1600, doi:10.5194/tc-9-1579-2015.

Cosens, B.A. et al., 2017: The role of law in adaptive governance. Ecol, Soc.
22(1), 1-30.

Coser, L.A., 1967: Continuities in the study of social conflict. Free Press, New
York, NY, USA.

Costas, S., O. Ferreira and G. Martinez, 2015: Why do we decide to live with
risk at the coast? Ocean Coast. Manage, 118, 1-11.

Cradock-Henry, N.A. et al., 2018: Dynamic adaptive pathways in downscaled
climate change scenarios. Clim. Change, 150(3—4), 333-341.

Craig, R.K. et al, 2017: Balancing stability and flexibility in adaptive
governance: an analysis of tools available in US environmental law. Ecol,
Soc. 22(2), 1-3.

Crespo, D. et al., 2017: New climatic targets against global warming: Will the
maximum 2°C temperature rise affect estuarine benthic communities. Sci
Rep., 7(1), 1-14, doi:10.1038/s41598-017-04309-0.

Crosby, S.C. et al., 2016: Salt marsh persistence is threatened by predicted sea
level rise. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci, 181, 93-99.

Crotty, S.M., C. Angelini and M.D. Bertness, 2017: Multiple stressors and
the potential for synergistic loss of New England salt marshes. PLoS One,
12(8), 1-13, doi:10.1371/journal. pone.0183058.

Csatho, B.M. et al. 2014: Laser altimetry reveals complex pattern of Greenland
Ice Sheet dynamics. PNAS, 111(52), 18478-18483.

Cuevas, S.C., 2018: Institutional dimensions of climate change adaptation:
insights from the Philippines. Clim. Policy, 18(4), 499-511.

Cuevas, S.C., A. Peterson, C. Robinson and T.H. Morrison, 2016: Institutional
capacity for long-term climate change adaptation: evidence from land use
planning in Albay, Philippines. Reg. Environ. Change, 16(7), 2045-2058.

Cullen-Unsworth, L.C. and R.K.F Unsworth, 2016: Strategies to enhance the
resilience of the world’s seagrass meadows. 4 Appi. Ecol, 53(4), 967-972,
doi:10.1111/1365-2664.12637.

Dahl-Jensen, D. et al, 2013: Eemian interglacial reconstructed from a
Greenland folded ice core. Nature, 493(7433), 489-494, doi:10.1038/
nature11789.

Daliakopoulos, |. et al. 2016: The threat of soil salinity: A European scale
review. Sci Total Environ., 573, 727-739.

Dang, T.D., TA. Cochrane and MLE. Arias, 2018: Future hydrological alterations
in the Mekong Delta under the impact of water resources development,
land subsidence and sea level rise. 4 Hydrol. Reg. Stud., 15, 119-133.

Dangendorf, S. et al, 2015: Detecting anthropogenic footprints in sea level
rise. Nat. Commun., 6, 1-9.

Dangendorf, S. et al, 2017: Reassessment of 20th century global mean sea
level rise. PNAS, 114(23}, 5946-5951.

Dannevig, H. and C. Aall, 2015: The regional level as boundary organization?
An analysis of climate change adaptation governance in Norway. Environ.
Sci. Policy, 54, 168-175.

Darby, S.E. et al., 2016: Fluvial sediment supply to a mega-delta reduced by
shifting tropical-cyclone activity. Nature, 539(7628), 276.

Daron, J.D. and D.R. Colenbrander, 2015: A critical investigation of evaluation
matrices to inform coastal adaptation and planning decisions at the local
scale. J Environ. Plan. Manage., 58(12), 2250-2270.

418

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Dasgupta, S. et al., 2017: The impact of aquatic salinization on fish habitats
and poor communities in a changing climate: evidence from southwest
coastal Bangladesh. Ecol. Econ., 139, 128-139.

Dasgupta, S. et al, 2019: Quantifying the protective capacity of mangroves
from storm surges in coastal Bangladesh. PLoS One, 14(3), e0214079.

Davis, K.£, A. Bhattachan, P. D’Odorico and S. Suweis, 2018: A universal model
for predicting human migration under climate change: examining future
sea level rise in Bangladesh. Environ. Res. Lett., 13(6), 064030.

Daviter, F, 2017: Coping, taming or solving: alternative approaches to the
governance of wicked problems. Policy Studies, 38(6), 571-588.

Dawson, D.A., A. Hunt, J. Shaw and W.R. Gehrels, 2018: The Economic Value of
Climate Information in Adaptation Decisions: Learning in the Sea level Rise
and Coastal Infrastructure Context. Fool Fcon., 150, 1-10.

Day, J.J. and K.I. Hodges, 2018: Growing land-sea temperature contrast and
the intensification of Arctic cyclones. Geophys. Res. Lett., 45(8), 3673-3681.

Day, J.W. et al., 2016: Approaches to defining deltaic sustainability in the 21st
century. Fstuar. Coast. Shelf Sci, 183, 275-291.

de Boer, B., P. Stocchi and R. Van De Wal, 2014: A fully coupled 3-D ice
sheet-sea level model: algorithm and applications. Geosci, Model Dev.,
7(5), 2141-2156.

de Boer, B., P. Stocchi, PL. Whitehouse and R. van de Wal, 2017: Current
state and future perspectives on coupled ice sheet-sea level modelling.
Quaternary Science Reviews, 169, 13-28.

de Bruijn, K., F. Klijn and J. Knoeff, 2013: Unbreachable embankments?
In pursuit of the most effective stretches for reducing fatality risk. In:
Comprehensive flood risk management. Research for policy and practice.
Proceedings of the 2nd European Conference on Flood Risk Management,
FLOODrisk2012, Rotterdam, the Netherlands, pp. 19-23.

de Haas, H., 2010: Migration and development: A theoretical perspective. int.
Migr. Rev., 44(1), 227-264.

de Neufville, R. and K. Smet, 2019: Engineering Options Analysis (EQOA).
In: Decision Making under Deep Uncertainty: From Theory to Practice
[Marchau, V.A.W.J., W.E. Walker, P.J.T.M. Bloemen and S.W. Popper (eds.)].
Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 117-132.

de Rydt, J., G. Gudmundsson, H. Rott and J. Bamber, 2015: Modeling the
instantaneous response of glaciers after the collapse of the Larsen B Ice
Shelf. Geophys. Res. Lett., 42(13), 5355-5363.

de Sherbinin, A. et al, 2011: Climate change. Preparing for resettlement
associated with climate change. Science, 334(6055), 456-457, doi:10.1126/
science.1208821.

de Souza Machado, AA., K.L. Spencer, C. Zarfl and FT. O'Shea, 2018:
Unravelling metal mobility under complex contaminant signatures. Sci
Total Environ., 622, 373-384.

de Vries, H. and R.S.W. van de Wal, 2015: How to interpret expert judgment
assessments of 21st century sea level rise. Clim. Change, 130(2}, 87-100,
doi:10.1007/s10584-015-1346-x.

de Vries, H. and R.S.W. van de Wal, 2016: Response to commentary by J. L.
Bamber, W. P. Aspinall and R. M. Cooke (2016). Clim. Change, 137(3-4),
329-332, doi:10.1007/s10584-016-1712-3.

de Winter, R. et al, 2017: Impact of asymmetric uncertainties in ice sheet
dynamics on regional sea level projections. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci.
17(12), 2125-2141.

Dean, R.G., 2002: Beach Nourishment: Theory and Practice. World Scientific,
Singapore, 420-pp.

DeCaro, D.A. et al, 2017: Legal and institutional foundations of adaptive
environmental governance. Ecol. Soc. 22(1), 1-32.

DeConto, R.M. and D. Pollard, 2016: Contribution of Antarctica to past
and future sea level rise. Nature, 531(7596), 591-597, doi:10.1038/
nature17145.

Den Uyl, R.M. and D.J. Russel, 2018: Climate adaptation in fragmented
governance settings: the consequences of reform in public administration.
Environ. Politics, 27(2), 341-361.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Dendy, S., J. Austermann, J. Creveling and J.J.Q.S.R. Mitrovica, 2017: Sensitivity
of Last Interglacial sea level high stands to ice sheet configuration during
Marine Isotope Stage 6. Quaternary Science Reviews, 171, 234-244.

Deng, J., C.D. Woodroffe, K. Rogers and J. Harff, 2017: Morphogenetic
modelling of coastal and estuarine evolution. Farth-Sci. Rev. 171, 254-271.

Dennig, F., 2018: Climate change and the re-evaluation of cost-benefit
analysis. Clim. Change, 151(1), 43-54.

Denton, F. et al, 2014: Climate-resilient pathways: adaptation, mitigation,
and sustainable development. In: Climate Change 2014: Working II Group
Contribution to the 5th Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change. e [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach,
M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.0. Estrada, R.C. Genova,
B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, PR. Mastrandrea, and
L.L.White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1101-1131.

Desbruyéres, D., E. L. McDonagh, B. A. King and V. Thierry, 2017: Global and
Full-Depth Ocean Temperature Trends during the Early Twenty-First Century
from Argo and Repeat Hydrography. 4 Clim., 30(6), 1985-1997.

Desmet, K., D.K. Nagy and E. Rossi-Hansberg, 2018: The geography of
development. / Politic. Econ., 126 (3), 903-983.

Desportes, |. and D.R. Colenbrander, 2016: Navigating interests, navigating
knowledge: Towards an inclusive set-back delineation along Cape Town's
coastline. Habitat int., 54, 124-135.

Dessu, $.B., R.M. Price, T.G. Troxler and J.S. Kominoski, 2018: Effects of sea level
rise and freshwater management on long-term water levels and water
quality in the Florida Coastal Everglades. { Environ. Manage., 211, 164-176.

Deudero, S., M. Vazquez-Luis and E. Alvarez, 2015: Human stressors are driving
coastal benthic long-lived sessile fan mussel Pinna nobilis population
structure more than environmental stressors. PLoS One, 10(7}, e0134530.

Deville, P. et al, 2014: Dynamic population mapping using mobile phone data.
PNAS, 111(45}, 15888-15893.

Dewan, C., A. Mukherji and M.-C. Buisson, 2015: Evolution of water
management in coastal Bangladesh: from temporary earthen embankments
to depoliticized community-managed polders. Water Int., 40(3), 401-416.

Dewulf, A. and C. Termeer, 2015: Governing the future? The potential of
adaptive delta management to contribute to governance capabilities for
dealing with the wicked problem of climate change adaptation. 4 Water
Clim. Change, 6(4), 759-771.

Diaz, D.B., 2016: Estimating global damages from sea level rise with the Coastal
Impact and Adaptation Model (CIAM). Clim. Change, 137 (1-2), 143-156.

Diaz, S. et al, 2019: Summary for policymakers of the global assessment
report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental
Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services [Cunha,
M.C.d., G. Mace and H. Mooney (eds.)]. Intergovernmental Science-Policy
Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services, IPBES Secretariat, Bonn,
Germany, 45-pp.

Dieng, H., A. Cazenave, B. Meyssignac and M. Ablain, 2017: New estimate
of the current rate of sea level rise from a sea level budget approach.
Geophys. Res. Lett., 44(8), 3744-3751.

Dieng, H.B. et al., 2015a: Total land water storage change over 2003-2013
estimated from a global mass budget approach. Environ. Res. Lett., 10(12),
124010.

Dieng, H.B. et al, 2015b: The sea level budget since 2003: inference on the
deep ocean heat content. Surv. Geophys., 36(2), 209-229.

Dinan, T., 2017: Projected Increases in Hurricane Damage in the United States:
The Role of Climate Change and Coastal Development. Fcol Fcon., 138,
186-198.

Dinniman, M.S. et al., 2016: Modeling ice shelffocean interaction in Antarctica:
A review. Oceanography, 29(4), 144-153.

Dittrich, R., A. Wreford and D. Moran, 2016: A survey of decision-making
approaches for climate change adaptation: Are robust methods the way
forward? Ecol. Econ., 122, 79-89, doi:10.1016/j.ecolecon.2015.12.006.

Chapter 4

Dixit, A.K., R.K. Dixit, R.S. Pindyck and R. Pindyck, 1994: Investment under
uncertainty. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, USA, 445-pp., ISBN
978-0-691-03410-2.

Doll, P. et al, 2016: Modelling freshwater resources at the global scale:
Challenges and prospects. Surv. Geophys., 37(2), 195-221.

Doll, P. et al, 2014: Global-scale assessment of groundwater depletion and
related groundwater abstractions: Combining hydrological modeling with
information from well observations and GRACE satellites. Water Resourc.
Res., 50(7), 5698-5720.

DolSak, N. and A. Prakash, 2018: The politics of climate change adaptation.
Annu. Rev. Environ. Resourc., 43, 317-341.

Donat-Magnin, M. et al., 2017: Ice shelf Melt Response to Changing Winds
and Glacier Dynamics in the Amundsen Sea Sector, Antarctica. 4 Geophys.
Res-Oceans, 122(12), 10206-10224, doi:10.1002/2017)C013059.

Donchyts, G. et al., 2016: Earth's surface water change over the past 30 years.
Nature Clim. Change, 6(9), 810-813, doi:10.1038/nclimate3111.

Doody, J.P., 2013: Coastal squeeze and managed realignment in southeast
England, does it tell us anything about the future? Ocean Coast. Manage,
79, 34-41.

Doswald, N. et al., 2012: Review of the evidence base for ecosystem-based
approaches for adaptation to climate change. Environ. Evid., 1, 1-11.

Dovers, S.R. and A.A. Hezri, 2010: Institutions and policy processes: the means
to the ends of adaptation. WiRes. Clim. Change, 1(2), 212-231.

Duarte, C.M. et al., 2013: The role of coastal plant communities for climate
change mitigation and adaptation. Nat. Clim. Change, 3(11), 961.

Dukes, F,, 1993: Public conflict resolution: A transformative approach. Negot.
£,9(1), 45-57.

Dunn, FE. et al, 2018: Projections of historical and 21st century fluvial
sediment delivery to the Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna, Mahanadi, and
Volta deltas. Sci. Total Environ., 642, 105-116.

Disterhus, A., M.E. Tamisiea and S. Jevrejeva, 2016: Estimating the sea level
highstand during the last interglacial: a probabilistic massive ensemble
approach. Geophys. J Int., 206(2), 900-920, doi:10.1093/gji/ggw1 74.

Dutra, LX. et al, 2015: Organizational drivers that strengthen adaptive capacity
in the coastal zone of Australia. Ocean Coast. Manage, 109, 64-76.

Dutrieux, P. et al., 2014: Strong sensitivity of Pine Island ice shelf melting to
climatic variability. Science, 343, 174-178.

Dutton, A. et al., 2015a: Sea level rise due to polar ice sheet mass loss during
past warm periods. Science, 349 (6244).

Dutton, A., J.M. Webster, D. Zwartz and K. Lambeck, 2015b: Tropical tales of
polar ice: evidence of Last Interglacial polar ice sheet retreat recorded by
fossil reefs of the granitic Seychelles islands. Quat. Sci Rev., 107, 182-196.

Duus-Otterstrém, G. and S.C. Jagers, 2011: Why (most) climate insurance
schemes are a bad idea. Environ. Politics, 20(3), 322-339.

Duvat, V., 2013: Coastal protection structures in Tarawa atoll, Republic of
Kiribati. Sustain. Sci, 8(3), 363-379.

Duvat, V., A. Magnan and F. Pouget, 2013: Exposure of atoll population to
coastal erosion and flooding: a South Tarawa assessment, Kiribati. Sustain.
Sci, 8 (3), 423-440.

Duvat, V. et al., 2017: Trajectories of exposure and vulnerability of small
islands to climate change. WiRes. Clim. Change, 8(6), 1-14.

Duvat, V.K., 2019: A global assessment of atoll island planform changes over
the past decades. WiRes. Clim. Change, 10(1), e557.

Duy Vinh, V., S. Ouillon and D. Van Uu, 2018: Estuarine Turbidity Maxima and
variations of aggregate parameters in the Cam-Nam Trieu estuary, North
Vietnam, in early wet season. Water, 10(1), 68.

Dyckman, C.S., C.S. John and J.B. London, 2014: Realizing managed retreat
and innovation in state-level coastal management planning. Ocean Coast.
Manage, 102, 212-223.

Edwards, T. et al., 2014: Effect of uncertainty in surface mass balance-elevation
feedback on projections of the future sea level contribution of the
Greenland ice sheet. The Cryosphere, 8(1), 195.

419

 
 

Chapter 4

Edwards, T.L. et al, 2019: Revisiting Antarctic ice loss due to marine ice-cliff
instability. Nature, 566(7742), 58-64, doi:10.1038/s41586-019-0901-4.
EEA, 2013: Late lessons from early warnings: science, precaution, innovation.
European Environment Agency [Available at: www.eea.europa.eu/

publications/late-lessons-2]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Eijgenraam, C., R. Brekelmans, D. den Hertog and K. Roos, 2016: Optimal
Strategies for Flood Prevention. Manag. Sci, 63, 1644-1656, doi:10.1287/
mnsc.2015.2395.

Eisenack, K. et al, 2014: Explaining and overcoming barriers to climate
change adaptation. Nat. Clim. Change, 4(10), 867-872.

Eisenack, K. and R. Stecker, 2012: A framework for analyzing climate change
adaptations as actions. Mitig. Adapt. Strat. GL, 17(3), 243-260.

Ekstrom, J.A. and $ C. Moser, 2014: Identifying and overcoming barriers in
urban climate adaptation: case study findings from the San Francisco Bay
Area, California, USA. Urban Clim., 9, 54-74.

El-Sayed, A.-FM., 2016: Fish and fisheries in the Nile Delta. In: The Nile Delta:
the handbook of environmental chemistry, Springer, Cham, pp. 495-516,
ISBN: 978-3-319-56124-0.

El-Zein, A. and FN. Tonmoy, 2017: Nonlinearity, fuzziness and
incommensurability in indicator-based assessments of vulnerability to
climate change: A new mathematical framework. Ecol Indic., 82, 82-93.

Elliff, C.1. and I.R. Silva, 2017: Coral reefs as the first line of defense: Shoreline
protection in face of climate change. Mar. Environ. Res., 127, 148-154.

Ellingwood, B.R. and JY. Lee, 2016: Managing risks to civil infrastructure due
to Nat. Hazards: communicating long-term risks due to climate change. In:
Risk Analysis of Natural Hazards. Gardoni P., Murphy C., Rowell A. (eds.)
Springer, pp. 97-112, ISBN: 987-3-319-22126-7.

Elrick-Barr, C., B.C. Glavovic and R. Kay, 2015: A tale of two atoll nations:
A comparison of risk, resilience, and adaptive response of Kiribati and
the Maldives. In: Climate Change and the Coast: Building Resilient
Communities. Bruce Glavovic; Michael Kelly; Robert Kay; Ailbhe Travers
(eds). CRC Press, pp. 313-336, ISBN: 9780415464871.

Elrick-Barr, C.E., D.C. Thomsen, B.L. Preston and T.F. Smith, 2017: Perceptions
matter: household adaptive capacity and capability in two Australian
coastal communities. Reg. Environ. Change, 17(4), 1141-1151.

Elshinnawy, I. et al., 2010: Climate Change Risks to Coastal Development
and Adaptation Options in the Nile Delta. United Nations Development
Programme; Stockholm Environment Institute; Coastal Research Institute,
Fund, M.A. [Available at: www.nile-delta-adapt.org/index.php?view=Down
LoadAct&id=4]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Emanuel, K., 2005: Increasing destructiveness of tropical cyclones over the
past 30 years. Nature, 436, 686, doi:10.1038/nature03906.

Emanuel, K., 2013: Downscaling CMIP5 climate models shows increased
tropical cyclone activity over the 21st century. PNAS, 110(30), 12219-
12224, doi:10.1073/pnas.1301293110.

Emanuel, K., 2015: Effect of Upper-Ocean Evolution on Projected Trends
in Tropical Cyclone Activity. £ Clim., 28(20), 8165-8170, doi:10.1175/
JCLI-D-15-0401.1.

Emanuel, K., 2017a: Assessing the present and future probability of Hurricane
Harvey's rainfall. PNAS, 114(48), 12681-12684.

Emanuel, K., 2017b: Will Global Warming Make Hurricane Forecasting
More Difficult? Bull Am. Meteorol. Soc., 98(3), 495-501, doi:10.1175/
BAMS-D-16-0134.1.

Emanuel, K., R. Sundararajan and J. Williams, 2008: Hurricanes and global
warming: Results from downscaling IPCC AR4 simulations. Bull Am.
Meteorol. Soc., 89(3), 347-367, doi:10.1175/bams-89-3-347.

Enderlin, E.M., 1.M. Howat, S. Jeong, M.-J. Noh, J.H. van Angelen, and MLR. van
den Broeke, 2014: An improved mass budget for the Greenland ice sheet.
Geophys. Res. Lett, 41, 866-872, doi:10.1002/2013GL059010.

England, M.H. et al. 2014: Recent intensification of wind-driven circulation in
the Pacific and the ongoing warming hiatus. Nat. Clim. Change, 4(3), 222.

420

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Ensor, J. and B. Harvey, 2015: Social learning and climate change adaptation:
evidence for international development practice. WiRes. Clim. Change,
6(5), 509-522.

Environment Agency, 2015: Cost estimation for coastal protection - summary
of evidence. Environment Agency, Bristol, UK, Report $C080039/R7.

Epple, C. et al, 2016: Shared goals — joined-up approaches? Why action under
the Paris Agreement, the Sustainable Development Goals and the Strategic
Plan for Biodiversity 2011-2020 needs to come together at the landscape
level. In: CBD COP 13, UNEP-WCMC and IUCN, IIED code: G04113.
[Available at: https://pubs.iied.org/G041 1 3/]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Erftemeijer, P.L. and R.R.R. Lewis III, 2006: Environmental impacts of dredging
on seagrasses: a review. Mar. Pollut. Bull, 52(12), 1553-1572.

Erftemeijer, P.L., B. Riegl, B.W. Hoeksema and P.A. Todd, 2012: Environmental
impacts of dredging and other sediment disturbances on corals: a review.
Mar. Pollut. Bull, 64(9), 1737-1765.

Ericson, J.P. et al, 2006: Effective sea level rise and deltas: causes of change
and human dimension implications. Global Planet. Change, 50(1-2), 63-82.

Eriksen, S.H., A.J. Nightingale and H. Eakin, 2015: Reframing adaptation: The
political nature of climate change adaptation. Global Environ. Chang., 35,
523-533.

Esteban, M. et al, 2019: Adaptation to sea level rise on low coral islands:
Lessons from recent events. Ocean Coast. Manage, 168, 35-40.

Esteves, L.S., 2013: Is managed realignment a sustainable long-term coastal
management approach? J. Coast. Res., 65(sp1), 933-939.

Everard, M., L. Jones and B. Watts, 2010: Have we neglected the societal
importance of sand dunes? An ecosystem services perspective. Aquat.
Conserv.: Mar. Freshw. Ecosyst., 20(4), 476-487.

Eyre, B.D. et al., 2018: Coral reefs will transition to net dissolving before end
of century. Science, 359(6378), 908-911.

Fang, Y., J. Yin and B. Wu, 2016: Flooding risk assessment of coastal tourist
attractions affected by sea level rise and storm surge: a case study in
Zhejiang Province, China. Nat. Hazards, 84(1), 611-624.

Fang, Z., PT. Freeman, C.B. Field and K.J. Mach, 2018: Reduced sea ice
protection period increases storm exposure in Kivalina, Alaska. Arctic
Science, 4(4), 525-537.

Farbotko, C., E. Stratford and H. Lazrus, 2016: Climate migrants and new
identities? The geopolitics of embracing or rejecting mobility. Social &
Cultural Geography, 17(4), 533-552.

Farinotti, D. et al., 2019: A consensus estimate for the ice thickness distribution
of all glaciers on Earth. Nature Geoscience, 12(3), 168-173.

Farquharson, L. et al., 2018: Temporal and spatial variability in coastline
response to declining sea-ice in northwest Alaska. Mar. Geol , 404, 71-83.

Farrell, W.E. and J.A. Clark, 1976: On Postglacial Sea Level. Geophysical
Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society, 46(3), 647-667, doi:10.1111/
j.1365-246X.1976.tb01252.x.

Fasullo, J., R. Nerem and B. Hamlington, 2016: Is the detection of accelerated
sea level rise imminent? Sci Rep., 6, 31245.

Fasullo, J.T., C. Boening, FW. Landerer and R.S. Nerem, 2013: Australia’s
unique influence on global sea level in 2010-2011. Geophys. Res. Lett.,
40(16), 4368-4373, doi:10.1002/grl.50834.

Fatori¢, S. and E. Seekamp, 2017a: Are cultural heritage and resources
threatened by climate change? A systematic literature review. Clim.
Change, 142(1-2), 227-254.

Fatori¢, S. and E. Seekamp, 2017b: Evaluating a decision analytic approach to
climate change adaptation of cultural resources along the Atlantic Coast
of the United States. Land Use Policy, 68, 254-263.

Favier, L. et al, 2014: Retreat of Pine Island Glacier controlled by marine ice
sheet instability. Nat. Clim. Change, 4(2), 117-121.

Fawcett, D., T. Pearce, J.D. Ford and L. Archer, 2017: Operationalizing
longitudinal approaches to climate change vulnerability assessment.
Global Environ. Chang., 45, 79-88.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Feldmann, J. and A. Levermann, 2015: Collapse of the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet after local destabilization of the Amundsen Basin. PNAS, 112(46),
14191-14196.

Felsenstein, D. and M. Lichter, 2014: Social and economic vulnerability of
coastal communities to sea level rise and extreme flooding. Nat. Hazards,
71(1), 463-491.

FEMA, 2014: Homeowner's Guide to Retrofitting P-312. Federal Emergency
Management Agency, Washington, D.C., USA. [Available at: www.fema.
gov/media-library-data/1404148604102-f210b5e43aba0fb393443fe7ae9
cd953/FEMA_P-312.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

FEMA, 2015: Hazard Mitigation Assistance Guidance. Hazard Mitigation Grant
Program, Pre-Disaster Mitigation Program, and Flood Mitigation Assistance
Program, Federal Emergency Management Agency, Washington, D.C.,
USA [Available at: www.fema.gov/media-library-data/1424983165449-
38f5dfc69cO0bd4ea8a1 61e8bb7b79553/HMA_Guidance_022715_508.
pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

FEMA, 2018: 2017 Hurricane Season: FEMA After-Action Report. Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Washington, D.C., USA [Available at:
www. fema.gov/media-library-data/1531743865541-d16794d43d308254
4435e1471da07880/201 7FEMAHurricaneAAR. pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Feng, X. and M.N. Tsimplis, 2014: Sea level extremes at the coasts of China.
J. Geophys. Res-Oceans, 119(3), 1593-1608, doi:10.1002/2013JC009607.

Ferguson, G. and T. Gleeson, 2012: Vulnerability of coastal aquifers to
groundwater use and climate change. Nat. Clim. Change, 2(5), 342.

Fernandez, R. and L. Schafer, 2018: Impact evaluation of climate risk
insurance approaches. Status quo and way forward. Series, D.P. (ed.}].
United Nations University-Institute for Environment and Human Security,
Bonn, Germany [Available at: https://collections.unu.edu/eserv/UNU:6699/
Discussion_paper_MCII_Final_June_11_vs.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Ferrario, F. et al, 2014: The effectiveness of coral reefs for coastal hazard risk
reduction and adaptation. Nat. Commun., 5, 1-9.

Fettweis, X. et al, 2017: Reconstructions of the 1900-2015 Greenland ice
sheet surface mass balance using the regional climate MAR model. The
Cryosphere, 11(2), 1015.

Fettweis, X. et al., 2013: Estimating the Greenland ice sheet surface mass
balance contribution to future sea level rise using the regional atmospheric
climate model MAR. The Cryosphere, 7, 469-489.

Fiedler, J.W. and C.P. Conrad, 2010: Spatial variability of sea level rise due to
water impoundment behind dams. Geophys. Res. Lett., 37(12).

Field, C.R., AA. Dayer and C.S. Elphick, 2017: Landowner behavior
can determine the success of conservation strategies for ecosystem
migration under sea level rise. PNAS, 114(34), 9134-9139, doi:10.1073/
pnas.1620319114.

Field, M.E., A.S. Ogston and C.D. Storlazzi, 2011: Rising sea level may cause
decline of fringing coral reefs. Fos, 92(33), 273-274.

Figueiredo, R. and M. Martina, 2016: Using open building data in the
development of exposure data sets for catastrophe risk modelling. Nat.
Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 16(2), 417.

Fincher, R., J. Barnett, S. Graham and A. Hurlimann, 2014: Time stories: Making
sense of futures in anticipation of sea level rise. Geoforum, 56, 201-210.

Fink, J.H., 2019: Contrasting governance learning processes of climate-leading
and-lagging cities: Portland, Oregon, and Phoenix, Arizona, USA. J. Environ.
Pol. Plan., 21(1), 16-29.

Finkbeiner, E.M. et al., 2018: Exploring trade-offs in climate change response
in the context of Pacific Island fisheries. Mar. Policy, 88, 359-364.

Fischer, H. et al, 2018: Palaeoclimate constraints on the impact of 2°C
anthropogenic warming and beyond, Nature Geoscience, 11(7). 474-485.

Fischetti, M., 2015: Is New Orleans Safer Today Than When Katrina Hit 10
Years Ago? Sci American, [Available at: www.scientificamerican.com/
article/is-new-orleans-safer-today-than-when-katrina-hit-10-years-ago/].
Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Chapter 4

Fish, R., A. Church and M. Winter, 2016: Conceptualising cultural ecosystem
services: a novel framework for research and critical engagement. Ecosyst.
Serv., 21, 208-217.

Flood, S., N.A. Cradock-Henry, P. Blackett and P. Edwards, 2018: Adaptive
and interactive climate futures: Systematic review of ‘serious games’ for
engagement and decision-making. Environ. Res. Lett., 13(6), 063005.

Flower, H., M. Rains and C. Fitz, 2017: Visioning the Future: Scenarios
Modeling of the Florida Coastal Everglades. Environ. Manage, 60(5),
989-1009, doi:10.1007/s00267-017-0916-2.

Flowers, G.E., 2018: Hydrology and the future of the Greenland Ice Sheet. Nat.
Commun., 9(1), 2729, doi:10.1038/s41 467-018-05002-0.

Flynn, M. et al., 2018: Participatory scenario planning and climate change
impacts, adaptation and vulnerability research in the Arctic. Environ. Sci.
Policy, 79, 45-53.

Foerster, A., A. Macintosh and J. McDonald, 2015: Trade-Offs in Adaptation
Planning: Protecting Public Interest Environmental Values. J Environ. Law,
27(3), 459-487.

Fonseca, M.S. and J.A. Cahalan, 1992: A preliminary evaluation of wave
attenuation by four species of seagrass. Fstuar. Coast. Shelf Sci, 35(6),
565-576.

Forbes, D.L., 2011: State of the Arctic coast 2010: scientific review and outlook.
Land-Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone, Institute of Coastal Research.

Forbes, D.L., 2019: Arctic Deltas and Estuaries: A Canadian Perspective. Coasts
and Estuaries. [Wolanski, E., Day, J., Elliott, M. and Ramachandran, R.
(eds.)]. Elsevier, 123-147, ISBN 9780128140031.

Forbes, D.L. et al., 2018: Coastal environments and drivers. In: From Science to
Policy in the Eastern Canadian Arctic: An Integrated Regional Impact Study
(IRIS) of Climate Change and Moderization (Bell, T. and T.M. Brown (eds.)].
ArcticNet, Quebec, pp. 210-249.

Ford, J., T. Bell and N. Couture, 2016a: Perspectives of Canada’s North Coast
region. Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Assessment of Canada’s
Marine Coasts, [D.S. Lemmen, FJ. Warren, T.S. James and C.S.L. Mercer
Clarke; Government of Canada (eds.)], Ottawa, Canada, pp. 153-206.

Ford, J.D. et al., 2012: Mapping human dimensions of climate change research
in the Canadian Arctic. Ambio, 41(8), 808-822.

Ford, J.D. et al, 2016b: Including indigenous knowledge and experience in
IPCC assessment reports. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(4), 349-353.

Ford, J.D., G. McDowell and J. Jones, 2014: The state of climate change
adaptation in the Arctic. Fnviron. Res. Lett., 9(10), 104005.

Ford, J.D., G. McDowell and T. Pearce, 2015: The adaptation challenge in the
Arctic. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(12), 1046-1053.

Forester, J., 1987: Planning in the face of conflict: Negotiation and mediation
strategies in local land use regulation. / Am. Plan. Assoc., 53(3), 303-314.

Forester, J., 2006: Making participation work when interests conflict:
Moving from facilitating dialogue and moderating debate to mediating
negotiations. J Am. Plan. Assoc., 72(4), 447-456.

Forget, G. and R.M. Ponte, 2015: The partition of regional sea level variability.
Progr. Oceanogr., 137, 173-195.

Forino, G., J. Von Meding and G.J. Brewer, 2018: Challenges and opportunities
for Australian local governments in governing climate change adaptation
and disaster risk reduction integration. int. 4 Disaster Resilience Built
Environ. 9(3), 258-272.

Foster, T.E. et al., 2017: Modeling vegetation community responses to sea
level rise on Barrier Island systems: A case study on the Cape Canaveral
Barrier Island complex, Florida, USA. PLoS One, 12(8), e0182605.

Foteinis, S. and C.E. Synolakis, 2015: Beach erosion threatens Minoan beaches:
a case study of coastal retreat in Crete. Shore Beach, 83(1), 53-62.

Francesch-Huidobro, M. et al., 2017: Governance challenges of flood-prone
delta cities: Integrating flood risk management and climate change in
spatial planning. Progress in Planning, 114, 1-27.

Frankcombe, L.M., S. McGregor and M.H. England, 2015: Robustness of the
modes of Indo-Pacific sea level variability. Gim. Dyn., 45(5-6), 1281-1298.

421

 
 

Chapter 4

Frederikse, T., S. Jevrejeva, R.E. Riva and S. Dangendorf, 2018: A consistent
sea level reconstruction and its budget on basin and global scales over
1958-2014. J Clim., 31(3), 1267-1280.

Frederikse, T., R.E. Riva and M.AJ.G.R.L. King, 2017: Ocean bottom
deformation due to present-day mass redistribution and its impact on sea
level observations. Geophysical Research Letters, 44(24), 306-314.

French, PW., 2006: Managed realignment-the developing story of a
comparatively new approach to soft engineering. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci,
67(3), 409-423.

Fretwell, P. et al, 2013: Bedmap2: improved ice bed, surface and thickness
datasets for Antarctica. The Cryosphere, 7(1), 375-393.

Freudenburg, W.R., R.B. Gramling, S. Laska and K. Erikson, 2009: Catastrophe
in the making: the engineering of Katrina and the disasters of tomorrow.
Island Press, Washington, D.C., USA, 201-pp., ISBN 978-1-59726-682-6.

Frihy, 0.E.S., E.A. Deabes, S.M. Shereet and F.A. Abdalla, 2010: Alexandria-Nile
Delta coast, Egypt: update and future projection of relative sea level rise.
Environ. Earth Sci, 61(2), 253-273.

Fritz, M., J. E. Vonk and H. Lantuit, 2017: Collapsing arctic coastlines. Nat.
Clim. Change, 7(1), 6.

First, J., H. Goelzer and P. Huybrechts, 2015: Ice-dynamic projections of the
Greenland ice sheet in response to atmospheric and oceanic warming. The
Cryosphere, 9(3), 1039-1062.

First, J.J. et al, 2016: The safety band of Antarctic ice shelves. Nat. Clim.
Change, 6, 479, doi:10.1038/nclimate2912.

Ganju, N.K. et al, 2017: Spatially integrative metrics reveal hidden
vulnerability of microtidal salt marshes. Nat. Commun., 8, 1-7.

Garai, J., 2016: Gender Specific Vulnerability in Climate Change and Possible
Sustainable Livelihoods of Coastal People. A Case from Bangladesh.
Revista de Gestéo Costeira Integrada-/ournal of Integrated Coastal Zone
Management, 16(1), 79-88.

Garcin, M. et al., 2016: Lagoon islets as indicators of recent environmental
changes in the South Pacific-The New Caledonian example. Cont. Shelf
Res., 122, 120-140.

Garner, A.J. et al, 2017: Impact of climate change on NYC's coastal flood
hazard: Increasing flood heights from the preindustrial to 2300 CE. PNAS,
114(45), 11861-11866.

Garner, K.L. et al, 2015: Impacts of sea level rise and climate change on
coastal plant species in the central California coast. Peer/, 3, e958-e958,
doi:10.7717/peerj.958.

Garschagen, M., 2015: Risky change? Vietnam's urban flood risk governance
between climate dynamics and transformation. Pac. Aff, 88(3), 599-621.

Gasson, E., R.M. DeConto and D. Pollard, 2016: Modeling the oxygen isotope
composition of the Antarctic ice sheet and its significance to Pliocene sea
level. Geology, 44(10), 827-830.

Gattuso, J.-P. et al, 2015: Contrasting futures for ocean and society from
different anthropogenic CO2 emissions scenarios. Science, 349(6243),
aac4722.

Gattuso, J.-P. et al, 2018: Ocean solutions to address climate change and its
effects on marine ecosystems. Front. Mar. Sci, 5, 337.

Gayen, B., R.W. Griffiths and R.C. Kerr, 2015: Melting Driven Convection at
the Ice-seawater Interface. Procedia IUTAM, 15, 78-85, doi:10.1016/.
piutam.2015.04.012.

Gebremichael, E. et al, 2018: Assessing Land Deformation and Sea
Encroachment in the Nile Delta: A Radar Interferometric and Inundation
Modeling Approach. / Geophys. Res-Earth, 123(4), 3208-3224.

Gedan, K.B. et al., 2011: The present and future role of coastal wetland
vegetation in protecting shorelines: answering recent challenges to the
paradigm. Clim. Change, 106(1), 7-29.

Gemenne, F. and J. Blocher, 2017: How can migration serve adaptation to
climate change? Challenges to fleshing out a policy ideal. Geogr. £, 183(4),
336-347, doi:10.1111/geoj.12205.

Gemenne, F. and P. Bricker, 2015: From the guiding principles on internal
displacement to the Nansen initiative: What the governance of

422

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

environmental migration can learn from the governance of internal
displacement. Int. 4 Refug. Law, 27(2), 245-263.

Genovese, E. and V. Przyluski, 2013: Storm surge disaster risk management:
the Xynthia case study in France. J Risk Res., 16(7), 825-841.

Genua-Olmedo, A., C. Alcaraz, N. Caiola and C. Ibafiez, 2016: Sea level
rise impacts on rice production: The Ebro Delta as an example. Sci. Total
Environ., 571, 1200-1210.

Gerritsen, H., 2005: What happened in 1953? The Big Flood in the Netherlands
in retrospect. Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A., 363(1831), 1271-1291.

Gharasian, C., 2016: Protection of natural resources through a sacred
prohibition: The rahui on Rapa iti. In: The Rahul: legal pluralism in Polynesian
traditional management of resources and territories [Bambridge, T. (ed.)].
Australian National University Press, Acton, Australian, pp. 139-153, ISBN:
9781925022919.

Ghoneim, E. et al, 2015: Nile Delta exhibited a spatial reversal in the rates
of shoreline retreat on the Rosetta promontory comparing pre-and
post-beach protection. Geomorphology, 228, 1-14.

Ghosh, M.K., L. Kumar and P.K. Langat, 2018: Mapping tidal channel dynamics
in the Sundarbans, Bangladesh, between 1974 and 2017, and implications
for the sustainability of the Sundarbans mangrove forest. Environ. Monit.
Assess., 190(10}, 582.

Giakoumi, S. et al, 2015: Towards a framework for assessment and
management of cumulative human impacts on marine food webs. Conserv.
Biol, 29(4), 1228-1234, doi:10.1111/cobi.12468.

Gibbs, M.T., 2016:Why is coastal retreat so hard to implement? Understanding
the political risk of coastal adaptation pathways. Ocean Coast. Manage,
130, 107-114.

Giddens, A., 2015: The politics of climate change. Policy & Politics, 43(2),
155-162.

Giesen, R.H. and J. Oerlemans, 2013: Climate-model induced differences in
the 21st century global and regional glacier contributions to sea level rise.
Clim. Dyn., 41(11-12), 3283-3300.

Gilbert, S., R. Horner, S. Gilbert and R. Horner, 1984: The Thames Barrier.
Society of Civil Engineers, London, ISBN 978-0727701824.

Gill, J.C. and B.D. Malamud, 2014: Reviewing and visualizing the interactions
of Nat. Hazards. Rev. Geophys, 52(4), 680-722.

Gilman, E. and J. Ellison, 2007: Efficacy of alternative low-cost approaches to
mangrove restoration, American Samoa. Estuaries Coasts, 30(4), 641-651.

Gingerich, $.B., C.l. Voss and A.G. Johnson, 2017: Seawater-flooding events
and impact on freshwater lenses of low-lying islands: Controlling factors,
basic management and mitigation. 4 Hydrol, 551, 676-688.

Gioli, G., G. Hugo, M.M. Costa and J. Scheffran, 2016: Human mobility, climate
adaptation, and development. Migration and Development, 5(2), 165-170.

Giosan, L., 2014: Protect the world’s deltas. Nature, 516(7529), 31.

Giri, C. et al, 2011: Status and distribution of mangrove forests of the world
using earth observation satellite data. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr, 20, 154-159.

Gittman, R.K. et al, 2015: Engineering away our natural defenses: an analysis
of shoreline hardening in the US. Front. Ecol. Environ., 13(6), 301-307.

Gittman, R.K. et al. 2016: Ecological consequences of shoreline hardening:
a meta-analysis. BioScience, 66(9), 763-773.

Glavovic, B.C., 2016: Towards deliberative coastal governance: insights from
South Africa and the Mississippi Delta. Reg. Environ. Change, 16(2), 353-365.

Glavovic, B.C., C. Cullinan and M. Groenink, 2018: The Coast. In: Fugg/e
and Rabie’s Environmental Management in South Africa, 3rd Edition
[King, N.D., H.A. Strydom and FP. Retief (eds.)]. Juta and Co., Cape Town,
pp. 653-733.

Glavovic, B.C. and G.P. Smith, 2014: Adapting to climate change: Lessons
from Natural Hazards planning. Springer, New York, NY, USA, ISBN 978-
94-017-8630-0, 451-pp.

Gleckler, P. et al., 2016: Industrial-era global ocean heat uptake doubles in
recent decades. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(4), 394-398.

Goeldner-Gianella, L. et al., 2019: The perception of climate-related coastal
risks and environmental changes on the Rangiroa and Tikehau atolls,
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

French Polynesia: The role of sensitive and intellectual drivers. Ocean
Coast. Manage, 172, 14-29.

Goelzer, H. et al, 2013: Sensitivity of Greenland ice sheet projections to
model formulations. / Glaciol, 59(216), 733-749.

Goelzer, H., P. Huybrechts, M.-F. Loutre and T. Fichefet, 2016: Last Interglacial
climate and sea level evolution from a coupled ice sheet-climate model.
Clim. Past, 12, 2195-2213, doi:10.5194/cp-12-2195-2016.

Golledge, N.R. etal. 2019: Global environmental consequences of twenty-first-
century ice sheet melt. Nature, 566(7742), 65-72, doi:10.1038/s41586-
019-0889-9.

Golledge, N.R. et al, 2015: The multi-millennial Antarctic commitment to
future sea level rise. Nature, 526(7573), 421-425.

Golledge, N.R., R.H. Levy, R.M. McKay and T.R. Naish, 2017: East Antarctic ice
sheet most vulnerable to Weddell Sea warming. Geophys. Res. Lett., 44(5),
2343-2351, doi:10.1002/2016GL072422.

Gomez, N., J.X. Mitrovica, P. Huybers and PU. Clark, 2010: Sea level
as a stabilizing factor for marine-ice sheet grounding lines. Nat. Geosci.,
3(12), 850.

Gomez, N., D. Pollard and D. Holland, 2015: Sea level feedback lowers
projections of future Antarctic Ice sheet mass loss. Nat. Commun., 6, 8798.

Gonzalez-Correa, J.M., Y.F. Torquemada and J.L.S. Lizaso, 2008: Long-term
effect of beach replenishment on natural recovery of shallow Posidonia
oceanica meadows. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci, 76(4), 834-844.

Goodwin-Gill, G. S. and J. McAdam, 2017: Climate Change Disasters and
Displacement. UNHCR [Available at: www.unhcr.org/596f25467.pdf].
Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Gorddard, R. et al., 2016: Values, rules and knowledge: adaptation as change
in the decision context. Environ. Sci. Policy, 57, 60-69.

Government of Canada, 1984: Western Arctic (Inuvialuit) Claims Settlement
Act, S.C. 1984, c. 24 (amended 2003). Minister of Justice, Ottawa.

Government of Egypt, 2016: Egypt Third National Communication: Under
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Ministry
of State for Environmental Affairs Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency;
United Nations Development Program; Global Environment Facility,
Agency, E.E.A., Cairo, Egypt [Available at: https://unfccc.int/files/national_
reports/non-annex_i_parties/biennial_update_reports/application/pdf/
tnc_report.pdf].

Government of India, 2018: Draft Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 2018.
New Delhi, India. [Available at: www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/files/
file/Draft%20Coastal%20Regulation%20Zone%20Notification, %202018.
pdf]. Accessed 2019/09/20.

Government of the Maldives. Census 2014. [Available at: http://statistics
maldives.gov.mv/census-2014/]. Accessed 2019/09/20.

Grady, A. et al, 2013: The influence of sea level rise and changes in fringing
reef morphology on gradients in alongshore sediment transport. Geophys.
Res. Lett., 40(12), 3096-3101.

Graham, S. et al., 2013: The social values at risk from sea level rise. Environ.
Impact Assess. Rev., 41, 45-52.

Gray, C. and E. Wise, 2016: Country-specific effects of climate variability on
human migration. Clim. Change, 135(3—4), 555-568.

Gregory, J. et al, 2019: Concepts and terminology for sea level — mean,
variability and change, both local and global. Surveys of Geophysics, 39-pp.

Gregory, J. and P. Huybrechts, 2006: Ice sheet contributions to future sea level
change. Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. A., 364(1844), 1709-1732.

Gregory, J.M., 2010: Long-term effect of volcanic forcing on ocean heat
content. Geophys. Res. Lett., 37(22).

Gregory, J.M. et al., 2013: Twentieth-century global-mean sea level rise: Is
the whole greater than the sum of the parts? 4 Clim., 26(13), 4476-4499,
doi:10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00319.1.

Griffies, S.M. and R.J. Greatbatch, 2012: Physical processes that impact
the evolution of global mean sea level in ocean climate models. Ocean
Modelling, 51, 37-72, doi:10.1016/j.ocemod.2012.04.003.

Chapter 4

Grifman, P. et al, 2013: Sea Level Rise Vulnerability Study for the City of Los
Angeles. University of Southern California, USCSG-TR-05-2013 [Available
at: https://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/2 91 /docs/pdfs/City_of_LA_SLR_
Vulnerability_Study_FINAL_Summary_Report_Online_Hyperlinks. pdf].
Accessed 2019/09/20.

Grinsted, A., S. Jevrejeva, R.E.M. Riva and D. Dahl-Jensen, 2015: Sea level rise
projections for Northern Europe under RCP8.5. Clim. Res., 64(1), 15-23,
doi: 10.3354/cr01309.

Grinsted, A., J.C. Moore and S. Jevrejeva, 2010: Reconstructing sea level from
palaeo and projected temperatures 200 to 2100 AD. Clim. Dyn., 34(4),
461-472.

Gu, X., 2005: Retrospect and prospect of 50 years construction of Huangpu
River flood control wall in Shanghai. Water, 21(2), 15-25 (in Chinese).
Gugliotta, M. et al., 2018: Sediment distribution and depositional processes
along the fluvial to marine transition zone of the Mekong River delta,

Vietnam. Sedimentology, 66(1), 146-164.

Gugliotta, M. et al., 2017: Process regime, salinity, morphological, and
sedimentary trends along the fluvial to marine transition zone of the
mixed-energy Mekong River delta, Vietnam. Cont. Shelf Res., 147, 7-26.

Haasnoot, M., J.H. Kwakkel, W.E. Walker and J. ter Maat, 2013: Dynamic
adaptive policy pathways: A method for crafting robust decisions
for a deeply uncertain world. Global Environ. Chang., 23, 485-498,
doi: 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.12.006.

Haasnoot, M. et al, 2012: Exploring pathways for sustainable water
management in river deltas in a changing environment. Clim. Change,
115, 795-819, doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0444-2.

Haasnoot, M., H. Middelkoop, E. van Beek and W.P.A. van Deursen, 2011:
A method to develop sustainable water management strategies for an
uncertain future. Sustain. Dev., 19, 369-381, doi:10.1002/sd.438.

Haasnoot, M. et al, 2019: Investments under non-stationarity: economic
evaluation of adaptation pathways. Clim. Change, 1-13.

Haasnoot, M., S. vant Klooster and J. van Alphen, 2018: Designing
a monitoring system to detect signals to adapt to uncertain climate
change. Global Environ. Chang., 52, 273-285.

Hagenlocher, M., FG. Renaud, S. Haas and Z. Sebesvari, 2018: Vulnerability
and risk of deltaic social-ecological systems exposed to multiple hazards.
Sci. Total Environ., 631, 71-80.

Haigh, |.D. et al, 2014a: Estimating present day extreme water level
exceedance probabilities around the coastline of Australia: tropical
cyclone-induced storm surges. Clim. Dyn., 42(1-2), 139-157.

Haigh, I.D. et al, 2014b: Timescales for detecting a significant acceleration in
sea level rise. Nat. Commun., 5, 3635.

Hall, .A. et al., 2019: Rising sea levels: Helping decision-makers confront the
inevitable. Coastal Manage., 47(2), 1-24.

Hallegatte, S., 2009: Strategies to adapt to an uncertain climate change.
Global Environ. Chang., 19(2), 240-247.

Hallegatte, S., C. Green, R.J. Nicholls and J. Corfee-Morlot, 2013: Future flood
losses in major coastal cities. Nat. Clim. Change, 3(9), 802.

Hallegatte, S. et al, 2012: Investment Decision Making under Deep
Uncertainty — Application to Climate Change. Policy Research Working
Papers, The World Bank [Available at: http://hdl. handle.net/10986/12028].
Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Hamilton, L.C. et al, 2016: Climigration? Population and climate change in
Arctic Alaska. Popul Environ. , 38(2), 115-133.

Hamilton, S.E. and D.A. Friess, 2018: Global carbon stocks and potential
emissions due to mangrove deforestation from 2000 to 2012. Nature Clim.
Change, 8(3), 240-244.

Hamlington, B. et al., 2018: Observation-Driven Estimation of the Spatial
Variability of 20th Century Sea Level Rise. / Geophys. Res-Oceans, 123(3),
2129-2140.

Hamlington, B. et al., 2013: Contribution of the Pacific Decadal Oscillation
to global mean sea level trends. Geophys. Res. Lett., 40(19), 5171-5175.

423

 
 

Chapter 4

Hamlington, B. et al, 2017: Separating decadal global water cycle variability
from sea level rise. Scientific Reports, 7(995), 1-7.

Hamlington, B. et al., 2014: Uncovering an anthropogenic sea level rise signal
in the Pacific Ocean. Nat. Clim. Change, 4(9), 782.

Hamlington, B. and P. Thompson, 2015: Considerations for estimating the
20th century trend in global mean sea level. Geophys. Res. Lett, 42(10),
4102-4109.

Hamylton, S., J.X. Leon, M.I. Saunders and C. Woodroffe, 2014: Simulating
reef response to sea level rise at Lizard Island: A geospatial approach.
Geomorphology, 222, 151-161.

Han, W. et al, 2014: Intensification of decadal and multi-decadal sea level
variability in the western tropical Pacific during recent decades. Clim. Dyn.,
43(5-6), 1357-1379.

Han, W. et al., 2017: Spatial patterns of sea level variability associated with
natural internal climate modes. Surv. Geophys., 38(1), 217-250.

Hanson, H. et al, 2002: Beach nourishment projects, practices, and
objectives — a European overview. Coast. Eng. J, 47(2), 81-111.

Hanson, $. et al, 2011: A global ranking of port cities with high exposure to
climate extremes. Clim. Change, 104(1), 89-111.

Haque, U. et al, 2012: Reduced death rates from cyclones in Bangladesh:
what more needs to be done? Bull. World Health Organ., 90, 150-156.
Hardaway Jr, C.S. and K. Duhring, 2010: Living Shoreline Design Guidelines for

Shore Protection in Virginia's Estuarine Environments Verson 1.2. Virginia
Institute of Marine Science, College of William and Mary, Gloucester
Point, Virginia [Available at: www.vims.edu/research/departments/
physical/programs/ssp/_docs/living_shorelines_guidelines.pdf]. Accessed:

2019/09/20.

Hardy, R.D. and M.E. Hauer, 2018: Social vulnerability projections improve sea
level rise risk assessments. Appl, Geogr. 91, 10-20.

Hardy, R.D., R.A. Milligan and N. Heynen, 2017: Racial coastal formation: The
environmental injustice of colorblind adaptation planning for sea level rise.
Geoforum, 87, 62-72.

Harig, C. and FJ. Simons, 2015: Accelerated West Antarctic ice mass loss
continues to outpace East Antarctic gains. Farth Planet. Sci Lett., 415,
134-141.

Harley, M.D. et al, 2017: Extreme coastal erosion enhanced by anomalous
extratropical storm wave direction. Sci Rep., 7(1), 6033.

Harris, D.L. et al, 2018: Coral reef structural complexity provides important
coastal protection from waves under rising sea levels. Sci Adv., 4(2).

Hart, G., 2011: Vulnerability and adaptation to sea level rise in Auckland, New
Zealand. New Zealand Climate Change Research Institute, Victoria University
of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand. [Available at: www.victoria.
ac.nz/sgees/research-centres/documents/vulnerability-and-adaptation-t
o-sea-level-rise-in-auckland-new-zealand. pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Hartig, E.K. et al., 2002: Anthropogenic and climate-change impacts on salt
marshes of Jamaica Bay, NYC. Wet/ands, 22(1), 71-89.

Hatzikyriakou, A. and N. Lin, 2017: Simulating storm surge waves for structural
vulnerability estimation and flood hazard mapping. Nat. Hazards, 89(2),
939-962.

Hauer, M.E., 2017: Migration induced by sea level rise could reshape the US
population landscape. Nat. Clim. Change, 7(5), 321.

Hauer, M.E., J.M. Evans and D.R. Mishra, 2016: Millions projected to be at risk
from sea-level rise in the continental United States. Nat. Clim. Change,
6(7), 691.

Hauer, M.E., R.D. Hardy, D.R. Mishra and J.S. Pippin, 2018: No landward
movement: examining 80 years of population migration and shoreline
change in Louisiana. Popul. Environ., 40(4), 1-19.

Hay, C.C. et al, 2017: Sea Level Fingerprints in a Region of Complex Earth
Structure: The Case of WAIS. Journal of Climate, 30(6), 1881-1892.

Hay, C.C., E. Morrow, R.E. Kopp and J.X. Mitrovica, 2015: Probabilistic
reanalysis of twentieth-century sea level rise. Nature, 517(7535), 481-484.

Hay, J.E., 2013: Small island developing states: coastal systems, global change
and sustainability. Sustain. Sci, 8(3), 309-326.

424

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Hay, J.E., 2017: Nadi flood control project. Climate risk and vulnerability
assessment. 52.

Haywood, A.M., H.J. Dowsett and A.M. Dolan, 2016: Integrating geological
archives and climate models for the mid-Pliocene warm period. Nat.
Commun., 7, 1-14 doi:10.1038/ncomms10646.

Head, B.W., 2014: Evidence, uncertainty, and wicked problems in climate
change decision making in Australia. Environ. Plan. C., 32(4), 663-679.
Head, B.W., 2018: Forty years of wicked problems literature: forging closer

links to policy studies. Policy and Society, 38(2), 1-18.

Head, B.W. and J. Alford, 2015: Wicked problems: Implications for public
policy and management. Adm. Soc., 47(6), 711-739.

Heberger, M., 2012: The impacts of sea level rise on the San Francisco
Bay. California Energy Commission. [Available at: https://ww2.energy.
ca.gov/201 2publications/CEC-500—201 2-01 4/CEC-500-2012-014. pdf].
Accessed 2019/09/20.

Hellmer, H.H., F Kauker, R. Timmermann and T. Hattermann, 2017: The Fate of
the Southern Weddell Sea Continental Shelf in a Warming Climate. £ Clim.,
30(12), 4337-4350, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-16-0420.1.

Helsen, M.M. et al, 2013: Coupled regional climate&ndash;ice sheet
simulation shows limited Greenland ice loss during the Eemian. Clim. Past,
9(4), 1773-1788, doi:10.5194/cp-9-1773-2013.

Hemer, M.A. et al, 2013: Projected changes in wave climate from a
multi-model ensemble. Nat. Clim. Change, 3(5), 471.

Hempelmann, N. et al, 2018: Web processing service for climate impact and
extreme weather event analyses. Flyingpigeon (Version 1.0). Comput.
Geosci., 110, 65-72.

Henry, O. et al, 2014: Effect of the processing methodology on satellite
altimetry-based global mean sea level rise over the Jason-1 operating
period. Journal of Geodesy, 88(4), 351-361.

Herath, D., R. Lakshman and A. Ekanayake, 2017: Urban Resettlement
in Colombo from a Wellbeing Perspective: Does Development-Forced
Resettlement Lead to Improved Wellbeing? 4 Refug. Stud., 30(4), 554-579.

Hereher, M., 2009: Inventory of agricultural land area of Egypt using MODIS
data. Egypt J. Remote Sens. Space Sci, 12, 179-184.

Hereher, M.E., 2010: Vulnerability of the Nile Delta to sea level rise:
an assessment using remote sensing. Geomat. Nat. Hazards Risk, 1(4),
315-321.

Hermann, E. and W. Kempf, 2017: Climate change and the imagining of
Migration: Emerging discourses on Kiribati’s land purchase in Fiji. Contemp.
Pac., 29(2), 231-263.

Hermans, L.M., M. Haasnoot, J. ter Maat and J.H. Kwakkel, 2017: Designing
monitoring arrangements for collaborative learning about adaptation
pathways. Environ. Sci. Policy, 69, 29-38.

Hernan, G. et al., 2017: Future warmer seas: increased stress and susceptibility
to grazing in seedlings of a marine habitat-forming species. Global Change
Biol, 23(11), 4530-4543, doi:10.111 1/gcb.13768.

Hesed, C.D.M. and M. Paolisso, 2015: Cultural knowledge and local
vulnerability in African American communities. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(7),
683-687.

Hewitson, B. et al, 2014: Regional context. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [VR Barros et al. (eds.)] Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1133-1197.

Higgins, S.A., 2016: Advances in delta-subsidence research using satellite
methods. Hydrogeol. J, 24(3), 587-600.

Hill, E.M., JL. Davis, M.E. Tamisiea and M. Lidberg, 2010: Combination of
geodetic observations and models for glacial isostatic adjustment fields in
Fennoscandia. /. Geophys. Res-Earth, 115(B07403), 1-12.

Hinkel, J. et al., 2018: The ability of societies to adapt to twenty-first-century
sea level rise. Nat. Clim. Change, 8(7), 570-578, doi:10.1038/s41558-018-
0176-z.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Hinkel, J. and A. Bisaro, 2016: Methodological choices in solution-oriented
adaptation research: a diagnostic framework. Reg. Environ. Change, 16,
7-20, doi:10.1007/s10113-014-0682-0.

Hinkel, J. et al, 2019: Meeting user needs for sea-level rise information:
a decision analysis perspective. Earth's Future, 7(3), 320-337.

Hinkel, J. et al., 2015: Sea level rise scenarios and coastal risk management.
Nat. Clim. Change, 5(3), 188-190.

Hinkel, J. et al, 2014: Coastal flood damage and adaptation costs under 21st
century sea level rise. PNAS, 111(9), 3292-3297.

Hinkel, J. et al, 2013a: A global analysis of erosion of sandy beaches and sea
level rise: An application of DIVA. Global Planet. Change, 111, 150-158.
Hinkel, J., D. Vuuren, R. Nicholls and R.T. Klein, 2013b: The effects of adaptation
and mitigation on coastal flood impacts during the 21st century. An
application of the DIVA and IMAGE models. Clim. Change, 117, 783-794.

Hino, M., C.B. Field and K.J. Mach, 2017: Managed retreat as a response to
natural hazard risk. Nat. Clim. Change.

Hirabayashi, Y. et al, 2013: Projection of glacier mass changes under a
high-emission climate scenario using the global glacier model HYOGA2.
Hydrol. Res. Lett., 7(1), 6-11.

Hiwasaki, L., E. Luna and J.A. Marcal, 2015: Local and indigenous knowledge
on climate-related hazards of coastal and small island communities in
Southeast Asia. Clim. Change, 128(1-2), 35-56.

Hoang, T.M.L. et al, 2016: Improvement of salinity stress tolerance in rice:
challenges and opportunities. Agronomy, 6(4), 54.

Hoegh-Guldberg, O. et al., 2018: Impacts of 1.5°C global warming on
natural and human systems. In: Global Warming of 1.5°C. An IPCC Special
Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C above pre-industrial
levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in
the context of strengthening the global response to the threat of
climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate
poverty [Masson-Delmotte, V., P. Zhai, H.-O. Pértner, D. Roberts, J. Skea,
PR. Shukla, A. Pirani, W. Moufouma-Okia, C. Péan, R. Pidcock, S. Connors,
J.B.R. Matthews, Y. Chen, X. Zhou, M.I. Gomis, E. Lonnoy, T. Maycock,
M. Tignor and T. Waterfield (eds.)], 175-311.

Hoegh-Guldberg, 0. et al., 2007: Coral Reefs Under Rapid Climate Change
and Ocean Acidification. Science, 80(318).

Hoeke, R.K. et al., 2013: Widespread inundation of Pacific islands triggered by
distant-source wind-waves. Global Planet. Change, 108, 128-138.

Hoffman, J.S., P.U. Clark, A.C. Parnell and F. He, 2017: Regional and global
sea-surface temperatures during the last interglaciation. Science,
355(6322), 276-279.

Hoggart, S. et al, 2014: The consequences of doing nothing: the effects of
seawater flooding on coastal zones. Coast. Eng. 1, 87, 169-182.

Holgate, S.J. et al., 2012: New data systems and products at the permanent
service for mean sea level. / Coast. Res., 29(3), 493-504.

Holland, B., 2017: Procedural justice in local climate adaptation: political
capabilities and transformational change. Environ. Politics, 26(3), 391-412.

Holland, PR., A. Jenkins and D.M. Holland, 2008: The response of ice shelf basal
melting to variations in ocean temperature. J Clim., 21(11), 2558-2572.

Hollowed, A.B. et al., 2013: Projected impacts of climate change on marine
fish and fisheries. ICES 4 Mar. Sci, 70(5), 1023-1037.

Holt, J.W. et al, 2006: New boundary conditions for the West Antarctic Ice
Sheet: Subglacial topography of the Thwaites and Smith glacier catchments.
Geophys. Res. Lett., 33(9).

Hoogendoorn, G. and J.M. Fitchett, 2018: Tourism and climate change: A
review of threats and adaptation strategies for Africa. Current Issues in
Tourism, 21(7), 742-759.

Hopper, T. and M.S. Meixler, 2016: Modeling Coastal Vulnerability through
Space and Time. PloS One, 11(10), e0163495-e0163495, doi:10.1371/
journal pone.0163495.

Hori, M. and M.J. Schafer, 2010: Social costs of displacement in Louisiana
after Hurricanes Katrina and Rita. Popul Environ., 31(1-3), 64-86.

Horikawa, K., 1978: Coastal Engineering. University of Tokyo Press, 402-pp.

Chapter 4

Horstman, E. et al., 2014: Wave attenuation in mangroves: A quantitative
approach to field observations. Coast. Eng. £, 94, 47-62.

Horton, B.P. et al, 2018: Mapping sea level change in time, space, and
probability. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resourc., 43, 481-521.

Horton, B.P.,$. Rahmstorf, S.E. Engelhart andA.C. Kemp, 2014: Expert assessment
of sea level rise by AD 2100 and AD 2300. Quat. Sci. Rev., 84, 1-6.

Hoshino, S. et al, 2016: Estimation of increase in storm surge damage due to
climate change and sea level rise in the Greater Tokyo area. Nat. Hazards,
80(1), 539-565.

Hossain, M., M. Ahmed, E. Ojea and J.A. Fernandes, 2018: Impacts and
responses to environmental change in coastal livelihoods of south-west
Bangladesh. Sci. Total Environ., 637, 954-970.

Hu, K., Q. Chen and H. Wang, 2015: A numerical study of vegetation impact
on reducing storm surge by wetlands in a semi-enclosed estuary. Coast.
Eng. 1, 95, 66-76.

Huang, P,, I.I. Lin, C. Chou and R.-H. Huang, 2015: Change in ocean subsurface
environment to suppress tropical cyclone intensification under global
warming. Nat. Commun., 6, 7188, doi:10.1038/ncomms8188.

Hughes, S., E.K. Chu and S.G. Mason, 2018: Climate change in cities.
Innovations in Multi-Level Governance. Cham: Springer International
Publishing (The Urban Book Series), ISBN: 978-3-319-65003-6.

Hughes, TP. et al., 2017: Coral reefs in the Anthropocene. Nature, 546(7656), 82.

Hunt, C., 2013: Benefits and opportunity costs of Australia’s Coral Sea marine
protected area: A precautionary tale. Mar. Policy, 39(352-260).

Hunter, J., 2010: Estimating sea level extremes under conditions of uncertain
sea level rise. Clim. Change, 99(3—4), 331-350.

Hunter, J., 2012: A simple technique for estimating an allowance for uncertain
sea level rise. Clim. Change, 113(2), 239-252, doi:10.1007/s10584-011-
0332-1.

Hunter, J., P. Woodworth, T. Wahl and R. Nicholls, 2017: Using global tide
gauge data to validate and improve the representation of extreme sea
levels in flood impact studies. Global Planet. Change, 156, 34-45.

Hunter, L.M., J.K. Luna and R.M. Norton, 2015: Environmental dimensions of
migration. Annu. Rev. Sociol, 41, 377-397.

Huntington, H.P. et al., 2019: Climate change in context: putting people first
in the Arctic. Reg. Environ. Change, 19(4), 1217-1223.

Hurlimann, A. et al, 2014: Urban planning and sustainable adaptation to sea
level rise. Landscape and Urban Planning, 126, 84-93.

Hurlimann, A.C. and A.P. March, 2012: The role of spatial planning in adapting
to climate change. WiRes. Clim. Change, 3(5), 477-488.

Huss, M. and R. Hock, 2015: A new model for global glacier change and sea
level rise. Front. Earth Sci, 3, 54.

Hussain, S.A. and R. Badola, 2010: Valuing mangrove benefits: contribution
of mangrove forests to local livelihoods in Bhitarkanika Conservation Area,
East Coast of India. Wetl Fcol Manag., 18, 321-331.

IDMC, 2017: Global Report on International Displacement. \nternational
Displacement Monitoring Centre [Available at: www.internal-displacement.
org/global-report/grid2 01 7/#download]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Ignatowski, JA. and J. Rosales, 2013: Identifying the exposure of two
subsistence villages in Alaska to climate change using traditional
ecological knowledge. Clim. Change, 121(2), 285-299.

Infantes, E. et al, 2012: Effect of a seagrass (Posidonia oceanica) meadow on
wave propagation. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser, 456, 63-72.

Institution of Civil Engineers, 2010: Facing-up to rising sea levels. Retreat?
Defend? Attack ?, RIBA Royal Institute of British Architects, London [Available
at: www. ice.org.uk/getattachment/news-and-insight/policy/facing-up-to-rising-
sea-levels/Facing-Up-to-Rising-Sea-Levels-Document-Final.pdf.aspx].
Accessed 2019/09/20.

International Association for Public Participation, 2018: IAP2 Spectrum
of Public Participation IAP2 International Federation, Australasia.
[Available at: https://cdn.ymaws.com/www.iap2.org/resource/resmgr/pillars/
Spectrum_8.5x11_Print.pdf]. Accessed 2019/09/20.

425

 
 

Chapter 4

IPCC, 2014: Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working
Groups |, If and Ill to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland. 151-pp.

IRC, 2016: Inuvialuit on the Frontline of Climate Change: Development of
@ Regional Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. Inuvialuit Regional
Corporation, Inuvik, 181-pp. (Available at: www. irc.inuvialuit.com/system/
files/Inuvialuit% 200n%20the%20Frontline %200f%20Climate%20
Change-Final-Feb2018%20%28SMALL%29. pdf}. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Irfanullah, H., A.K. Azad, Kamruzzaman and A. Wahed, 2011: Floating
Gardening in Bangladesh: a means to rebuild lives after devastating flood.
Indian J Tradit. Know., 10(1), 31-38.

Irrgang, A.M. et al, 2019: Impacts of past and future coastal changes on the
Yukon coast — threats for cultural sites, infrastructure, and travel routes.
Arctic Science, 5(2), 107-126.

Islam, M.R. and N.A. Khan, 2018: Threats, vulnerability, resilience and
displacement among the climate change and natural disaster-affected
people in South-East Asia: an overview. Journal of the Asia Pacific
Economy, 23(2), 297-323.

Isobe, M., 2013: Impact of global warming on coastal structures in shallow
water. Ocean Engineering, 71, 51-57.

ITK, 2018: National Inuit Strategy on Research. Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami, 43-pp.,
ISBN: 978-0-9699774-2-1.

Jackson, L.P. and S. Jevrejeva, 2016: A probabilistic approach to 21st century
regional sea level projections using RCP and high-end scenarios. Global
Planet. Change, 146, 179-189.

Jacob Balter, R.B., et al, 2017: MTA Climate Adaptation Task Force Resiliency
Report [Projjal Dutta, M.J., Madeline Smith, Nelson Smith, Susan Yoon (ed.)].
MTA, MTA, New York (Available at: http://web.mta.info/sustainability/pdf/
ResiliencyReport.pdf). Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Jamero, MLL. et al., 2017: Small-island communities in the Philippines prefer
local measures to relocation in response to sea level rise. Nat. Clim.
Change, 7(8), 581-586.

James, T. et al, 2015: Tabulated values of relative sea level projections in
Canada and the adjacent mainland United States. Geological Survey of
Canada, Open File 7942. doi:10.4095/297048.

Janif, S. et al, 2016: Value of traditional oral narratives in building
climate-change resilience: insights from rural communities in Fiji. Ecol
Soc., 21(2), 1-10.

Jankowski, K.L., TE. Térnqvist and A.M. Fernandes, 2017: Vulnerability of
Louisiana's coastal wetlands to present-day rates of relative sea level rise.
Nat. Commun., 8, 14792.

Jenkins, A. et al., 2018: West Antarctic Ice Sheet retreat in the Amundsen Sea
driven by decadal oceanic variability. Nat. Geosci,, 11(10), 733-741.

Jensen, L., R. Rietbroek and J. Kusche, 2013: Land water contribution to sea
level from GRACE and Jason-Imeasurements. 4 Geophys. Res-Oceans,
118(1), 212-226.

Jevrejeva, S., A. Grinsted and J.C. Moore, 2014a: Upper limit for sea level
projections by 2100. Environ. Res. Lett., 9(10), 104008.

Jevrejeva, S., A. Matthews and A. Slangen, 2017: The twentieth-century sea
level budget: recent progress and challenges. In: integrative Study of the
Mean Sea Level and Its Components. Springer, Cham, pp. 301-313, ISBN:
978-3-319-56490-6.

Jevrejeva, S. et al, 2014b: Trends and acceleration in global and regional sea
levels since 1807. Global Planet. Change, 113, 11-22.

Jevrejeva, S., J. Moore, A. Grinsted and P. Woodworth, 2008: Recent global
sea level acceleration started over 200 years ago? Geophys. Res. Lett.,
35(8), 1-4.

Jiang, Z. et al, 2018: Future changes in rice yields over the Mekong River
Delta due to climate change — Alarming or alerting? Theor. Appl. Climatol.,
127(1-2}, 545-555.

Jiménez Cisneros, B.E. et al, 2014: Freshwater resources. In Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report

426

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

John, B.M., K.G. Shirlal and S. Rao, 2015: Effect of Artificial Sea Grass on Wave
Attenuation-An Experimental Investigation. Aquatic Procedia, 4, 221-226.

Johnson, G.C. and D.P. Chambers, 2013: Ocean bottom pressure seasonal
cycles and decadal trends from GRACE Release-05: Ocean circulation
implications. 4 Geophys. Res-Oceans, 118(9), 4228-4240.

Jones, B. and B. O‘Neill, 2016: Spatially explicit global population scenarios
consistent with the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways. Environ. Res. Lett.,
11(8), 1-10.

Jones, N. and J. Clark, 2014: Social capital and the public acceptability of
climate change adaptation policies: a case study in Romney Marsh,
UK. Clim. Change, 123(2), 133-145.

Jones, N., LR. Clark and C. Malesios, 2015: Social capital and willingness-to-
pay for coastal defences in south-east England. Ecol Econ., 119, 74-82.
Jones, R. et al., 2014: Foundations for decision making. In: Climate Change
2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral
Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros,
D.J. Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
Y.0. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
PR. Mastrandrea and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,

Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Jones, S. et al, 2019: Roads to Nowhere in Four States: State and Local
Governments in the Atlantic Southeast Facing Sea level Rise. Co/um.
J Envtl L., 44, 67.

Jongman, B., P.J. Ward and J.C. Aerts, 2012: Global exposure to river and
coastal flooding: Long term trends and changes. Global Environ. Chang.,
22(4), 823-835.

Jongman, B. et al., 2015: Declining vulnerability to river floods and the global
benefits of adaptation. PNAS, 112(18), E2271-E2280.

Jonkman, S., J. Vrijling and A. Vrouwenvelder, 2008: Methods for the
estimation of loss of life due to floods: a literature review and a proposal
for a new method. Nat. Hazards, 46(3), 353-389.

Jonkman, $.N. et al, 2013: Costs of adapting coastal defences to sea level
rise — New estimates and their implications. { Coast. Res., 290, 1212-1226.

Jordan, J.C., 2015: Swimming alone? The role of social capital in enhancing
local resilience to climate stress: a case study from Bangladesh. Clim. Dev.,
7(2), 110-123.

Joseph, D.D., 2017: Social work models for climate adaptation: the case of
small islands in the Caribbean. Reg. Environ. Change, 17(4), 1117-1126.
Joughin, |., B.E. Smith and B. Medley, 2014: Marine ice sheet collapse
potentially under way for the thwaites glacier basin, West Antarctica.

Science, 344(6185), 735-738, doi:10.1126/science. 1249055.

JSCE, 2000: Design Manual for Coastal Facilities. Japanese Society of Civil
Engineers, Toyko, 577-pp.

Jurgilevich, A., A. Rasanen, F. Groundstroem and S. Juhola, 2017: A systematic
review of dynamics in climate risk and vulnerability assessments. Environ.
Res, Lett., 12(1), 013002.

Jurjonas, M. and E. Seekamp, 2018: Rural coastal community resilience:
Assessing a framework in eastern North Carolina. Ocean Coast. Manage,
162, 137-150.

Kabat, P. et al., 2009: Dutch coasts in transition. Nat. Geosci., 2(7), 450.

Kabir, M.J., D.S. Gaydon, R. Cramb and C.H. Roth, 2018: Bio-economic evaluation
of cropping systems for saline coastal Bangladesh: |. Biophysical simulation
in historical and future environments. Agric. Syst., 162, 107-122.

Kanada, S. et al., 2017: A Multimodel Intercomparison of an Intense Typhoon
in Future, Warmer Climates by Four 5-km-Mesh Models. J Clim., 30(15),
6017-6036.

Kaneko, S. and T. Toyota, 2011: Long-term urbanization and land subsidence
in Asian Megacities: an indicators system approach. In: Groundwater and
Subsurface Environments [Taniguchi, M. (ed.)]. Springer, Tokyo, pp. 249-
270, ISBN: 978-4-431-53904-9.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Kaniewski, D. et al, 2014: Vulnerability of mediterranean ecosystems
to long-term changes along the coast of Israel. PLoS One, 9(7}, 1-9,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0102090.

Kankara, R.S., M.V. Ramana Murthy and M. Rajeevan, 2018: National
Assessment of Shoreline changes along Indian Coast: Status report for 26
years (1990 — 2016). Ministry of Earth Sciences, National Centre for Coastal
Research, Chennai [Available at: www.indiaspend.com/wp-content/
uploads/2018/1 1/National-Assessment-of-Shoreline-Changes-NCCR-
report.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Karlsson, M. and G.K. Hovelsrud, 2015: Local collective action: Adaptation to
coastal erosion in the Monkey River Village, Belize. Global Environ. Chang.,
32, 96-107.

Karlsson, M., B. van Oort and B. Romstad, 2015: What we have lost and
cannot become: societal outcomes of coastal erosion in southern Belize.
Ecol. Soc., 20(1}, 1-13.

Karnauskas, K.B., J.P. Donnelly and K.J. Anchukaitis, 2016: Future freshwater
stress for island populations. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(7), 720-725.

Karpytchev, M. et al, 2018: Contributions of a Strengthened Early Holocene
Monsoon and Sediment Loading to Present-Day Subsidence of the Ganges-
Brahmaputra Delta. Geophys. Res. Lett., 45(3), 1433-1442.

Kashem, $.B., B. Wilson and S. Van Zandt, 2016: Planning for climate adaptation:
Evaluating the changing patterns of social vulnerability and adaptation
challenges in three coastal cities. Plan. Educ. Res., 36(3), 304-318.

Kates, R.W., C.E. Colten, S. Laska and S.P. Leatherman, 2006: Reconstruction
of New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina: a research perspective. PNAS,
103(40), 14653-14660.

Katsman, C.A. et al., 2011: Exploring high-end scenarios for local sea level
rise to develop flood protection strategies for a low-lying delta — the
Netherlands as an example. Clim. Change, 109(3—4), 617-645.

Keenan, J.M.,T. Hill and A. Gumber, 2018: Climate gentrification: from theory to
empiricism in Miami-Dade County, Florida. Environ. Res. Lett., 13(5), 054001.

Keim, M.E., 2010: Sea level-rise disaster in Micronesia: sentinel event for
climate change? Disaster Med. Public Health Prep., 4(1), 81-87.

Kellens, W. et al, 2011: An analysis of the public perception of flood risk on
the Belgian coast. Risk Anal, 31(7), 1055-1068.

Kelly, P.M., 2015: Climate drivers in coastal zone. In: Climate Change and the
Coast: Building Resilient Communities [Glavovic, B., M. Kelly, R. Kay and
A. Travers (eds.)]. CRC Press, Boca Raton; London; New York, pp. 29-49,
ISBN 978-1-4822-8858-2.

Kelman, |., 2018: Islandness within climate change narratives of small island
developing states (SIDS). isi Stud. £, 13(1), 149-166.

Kemp, A.C. et al., 2011: Climate related sea level variations over the past two
millennia. PNAS, 108(27), 11017-11022.

Kench, P.S. et al., 2018: Co-creating resilience solutions to coastal hazards
through an interdisciplinary research project in New Zealand. /. Coast. Res.,
85(sp1), 1496-1500.

Kernkamp, H.W.J.,A. Van Dam, G.S. Stelling and E.D. De Goede, 2011: Efficient
scheme for the shallow water equations on unstructured grids with
application to the Continental Shelf. Ocean Dynam., 61(8), 1175-1188,
doi:10.1007/s10236-011-0423-6.

Ketabchi, H. et al, 2014: Sea-level rise impact on fresh groundwater lenses in
two-layer small islands. Hydrol. Process., 28(24), 5938-5953.

Khai, H.V., N.H. Dang and M. Yabe, 2018: Impact of Salinity Intrusion on Rice
Productivity in the Vietnamese Mekong Delta. ALNABAS RE St
PEACE, 63(1), 143-148.

Khanom, T., 2016: Effect of salinity on food security in the context of interior
coast of Bangladesh. Ocean Coast. Manage, 130, 205-212.

Khazendar, A. et al, 2016: Rapid submarine ice melting in the grounding
zones of ice shelves in West Antarctica. Nat. Commun., 7, 13243.

Kim, M.J., R.J. Nicholls, J.M. Preston and G.A. de Almeida, 2018: An assessment
of the optimum timing of coastal flood adaptation given sea-level rise
using real options analysis. £ Flood Risk Manage., e12494, 1-17.

Chapter 4

Kind, J.M., 2014: Economically efficient flood protection standards for the
Netherlands: Efficient flood protection standards for the Netherlands.
J Flood Risk Manage., 7, 103-117, doi:10.1111/jfr3.12026.

King, D. et al, 2016: Land use planning for disaster risk reduction and climate
change adaptation: Operationalizing policy and legislation at local levels.
Int. £ Disaster Resilience Built Environ. 7(2), 158-172.

Kingslake, J., J.C. Ely, 1. Das and R.E. Bell, 2017: Widespread movement
of meltwater onto and across Antarctic ice shelves. Nature, 544(7650),
349-352.

Kirshen, P. et al, 2018: Engaging Vulnerable Populations in Multi-Level
Stakeholder Collaborative Urban Adaptation Planning for Extreme Events
and Climate Risks —-A Case Study of East Boston USA. Journal of Extreme
Events, 5(02n03), 1850013.

Kirwan, MLL. and J.P. Megonigal, 2013: Tidal wetland stability in the face of
human impacts and sea level rise. Nature, 504(7478), 53-60.

Kirwan, MLL. et al, 2016: Overestimation of marsh vulnerability to sea level
rise. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(3), 253.

Kittikhoun, A. and D.M. Staubli, 2018: Water diplomacy and conflict
management in the Mekong: From rivalries to cooperation. { Hydrol, 567,
654-667.

Kjeldsen, K.K. et al., 2015: Spatial and temporal distribution of mass loss from
the Greenland Ice Sheet since AD 1900. Nature, 528(7582), 396.

Klein, J., R. Mantysalo and S. Juhola, 2016: Legitimacy of urban climate change
adaptation: a case in Helsinki. Reg. Environ. Change, 16(3), 815-826.

Klein, R.J. et al, 2014: Adaptation opportunities, constraints, and limits.
Constraints, 16, 4.

Kleindorfer, P.R., H.G. Kunreuther and PJ. Schoemaker, 1993: Decision sciences:
an integrative perspective. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, pp
55, ISBN 0-521-32867-5.

Kleinherenbrink, M., R. Riva and T.J.0.S. Frederikse, 2018: A comparison of
methods to estimate vertical land motion trends from GNSS and altimetry
at tide gauge stations. Ocean Sci, 14(2), 187-204.

Klostermann, J. et al, 2018: Towards a framework to assess, compare and
develop monitoring and evaluation of climate change adaptation in
Europe. Mitig. Adapt. Strat. Gl, 23(2), 187-209.

Kniveton, D.R., C.D. Smith and R. Black, 2012: Emerging migration flows in a
changing climate in dryland Africa. Nat. Clim. Change, 2(6), 444.

Knutson, T.R. et al, 2015: Global projections of intense tropical cyclone
activity for the late twenty-first century from dynamical downscaling
of CMIP5/RCP4.5 scenarios. £ Clim., 28(18), 7203-7224, doi:10.1175/
JCLI-D-15-0129.1.

Koch, E.W. et al, 2009: Non-linearity in ecosystem services: temporal and
spatial variability in coastal protection. Front. Ecol. Environ., 7, 29-37.

Koch, M., G. Bowes, C. Ross and X. H. Zhang, 2013: Climate change and ocean
acidification effects on seagrasses and marine macroalgae. Global Change
Biol, 19(1), 103-132.

Koch, M.S. et al, 2015: Climate Change Projected Effects on Coastal
Foundation Communities of the Greater Everglades Using a 2060 Scenario:
Need for a New Management Paradigm. Environ. Manage., 55(4), 857-—
875, doi:10.1007/s00267-01 4-0375-y.

Kodikara, K.A S. et al., 2017: Have mangrove restoration projects worked? An
in-depth study in Sri Lanka. Restor. Ecol, 25(5), 705-716.

Koerth, J. et al, 2014: A typology of household-level adaptation to coastal
flooding and its spatio-temporal patterns. SpringerPlus, 3(1), 466.

Kokelj, S.V. et al., 2012: Using multiple sources of knowledge to investigate
northern environmental change: regional ecological impacts of a storm
surge in the outer Mackenzie Delta, NWT. Arctic, 257-272.

Kondolf, G.M. et al, 2014: Sustainable sediment management in reservoirs
and regulated rivers: Experiences from five continents. Farth’s Future, 2(5),
256-280.

Konikow, LF, 2011: Contribution of global groundwater depletion since 1900
to sea-level rise. Geophys. Res. Lett., 38(17), 1-5.

427

 
 

Chapter 4

Konrad, H., |. Sasgen, D. Pollard and V. Klemann, 2015: Potential of the
solid-Earth response for limiting long-term West Antarctic Ice Sheet retreat
in a warming climate. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 432, 254-264.

Kopp, R.E. et al, 2017: Evolving Understanding of Antarctic Ice sheet Physics
and Ambiguity in Probabilistic Sea level Projections. Farth’s Future, 5(12),
1217-1233, doi:10.1002/201 7ef000663.

Kopp, R.E. et al, 2014: Probabilistic 21st and 22nd century sea-level projections
at a global network of tide-gauge sites. Farth’s Future, 2(8), 383-406.

Kopp, R.E. et al., 2016: Temperature-driven global sea level variability in the
Common Era. PNAS, 113(11), 1434-1441.

Kopp, R.E. et al., 2009: Probabilistic assessment of sea level during the last
interglacial stage. Nature, 462(7275), 863-867, doi:10.1038/nature08686.

Kopp, R.E. et al, 2013: A probabilistic assessment of sea level variations
within the last interglacial stage. Geophys. J Int., 193(2), 711-716.

Koslov, L., 2019: Avoiding Climate Change: “Agnostic Adaptation” and the
Politics of Public Silence. Ann. Am. Assoc. Geogr., 109(2), 568-580.

Kossin, J.P, 2017: Hurricane intensification along United States coast
suppressed during active hurricane periods. Nature, 541(7637), 390.

Kossin, J.P., 2018: A global slowdown of tropical-cyclone translation speed.
Nature, 558(7708), 104.

Kossin, J.P., KA. Emanuel and G.A. Vecchi, 2014: The poleward migration of
the location of tropical cyclone maximum intensity. Nature, 509(7500),
349-352, doi:10.1038/nature1 3278.

Koubi, V., G. Spilker, L. Schaffer and T. Bohmelt, 2016: The role of environmental
perceptions in migration decision-making: evidence from both migrants and
non-migrants in five developing countries. Popul Environ., 38(2), 134-163.

Kousky, C., 2014: Managing shoreline retreat: a US perspective. Clim. Change,
124(1-2}, 9-20.

Krauss, K.W. et al., 2009: Water level observations in mangrove swamps
during two hurricanes in Florida. Wetlands, 29, 142-149.

Krauss, K.W. et al, 2014: How mangrove forests adjust to rising sea level.
New Phytol, 202(1), 19-34, doi:10.1111/nph.12605.

Kreft, S., L. Schaefer, E. Behre and D. Matias, 2017: Climate Risk Insurance
for Resilience: Assessing Countries Implementation Plans., United Nations
University Institute for Environment and Human Security (UNU-EHS), Bonn,
Germany [Available at: https://collections.unu.edu/eserv/UNU:6321/MCII_
DIE_171107_meta.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Kreibich, H. et al, 2017: Adaptation to flood risk: Results of international
paired flood event studies. Farth’s Future, 5(10), 953-965.

Kuipers Munneke, P., S.R.M. Ligtenberg, M.R. Van Den Broeke and
D.G. Vaughan, 2014: Firn air depletion as a precursor of Antarctic ice shelf
collapse. 4 Glaciol , 60(220}, 205-214, doi:10.3189/2014JoG13J183.

Kuipers Munneke, P. et al., 2012: Insignificant change in Antarctic snowmelt
volume since 1979. Geophys. Res. Lett., 39(1), 1-5.

Kuklicke, C. and D. Demeritt, 2016: Adaptive and risk-based approaches to
climate change and the management of uncertainty and institutional risk:
The case of future flooding in England. Global Environ. Chang. , 37, 56-68.

Kulp, S. and B.H. Strauss, 2016: Global DEM errors underpredict coastal
vulnerability to sea level rise and flooding. Front. Farth Sci, 4, 36.

Kulp, S. and B.H. Strauss, 2017: Rapid escalation of coastal flood exposure in
US municipalities from sea level rise. Clim. Change, 142(3-4), 477-489.
Kumar, L. and S. Taylor, 2015: Exposure of coastal built assets in the South

Pacific to climate risks. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(11), 992-996.

Kumari, R. et al., 2018: Groundswell: Preparing for Internal Climate
Migration. Chapter 2., The World Bank, Washington, DC [Available at:
www.worldbank.org/en/news/infographic/2018/03/19/groundswell--
-preparing-for-internal-climate-migration]. Accessed 2019/09/20.

Kunreuther, H., 2015: The role of insurance in reducing losses from extreme
events: The need for public-private partnerships. The Geneva Papers on
Risk and Insurance-Issues and Practice, 40(4), 741-762.

Kunreuther, H. et al., 2014: Integrated Risk and Uncertainty Assessment of
Climate Change Response Policies. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of
Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment

428

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. [Edenhofer, 0.,
R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, E. Farahani, S. Kadner, K. Seyboth, A. Adler,
|. Baum, S$. Brunner, P. Eickemeier, B. Kriemann, J. Savolainen, S. Schlémer,
C.v. Stechow, T. Zwickel and J.C. Minx (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Kunte, P.D. et al, 2014: Multi-hazards coastal vulnerability assessment of Goa,
India, using geospatial techniques. Ocean Coast. Manage, 95, 264-281.
Kura, Y., O. Joffre, B. Laplante and B. Sengvilaykham, 2017: Coping with
resettlement: A livelihood adaptation analysis in the Mekong River basin.

Land Use Policy, 60, 139-149.

Kwakkel, J.H., M. Haasnoot and W.E. Walker, 2016a: Comparing robust
decision-making and dynamic adaptive policy pathways for model-based
decision support under deep uncertainty. Environ. Modell. Softw., 86,
168-183.

Kwakkel, J.H., W.E. Walker and M. Haasnoot, 2016b: Coping with the
wickedness of public policy problems: approaches for decision making
under deep uncertainty. 4 Water Res. Plan. Man., 142(3), 1-5.

Kwakkel, J.H., W.E. Walker and V.A. Marchau, 2010: Classifying and
communicating uncertainties in model-based policy analysis. nt. J Technol.
Policy Manage., 10(4), 299-315.

Lamb, J.B. et al., 2017: Seagrass ecosystems reduce exposure to bacterial
pathogens of humans, fishes, and invertebrates. Science, 355, 731-733.
Lambeck, K., A. Purcell and A. Dutton, 2012: The anatomy of interglacial sea
levels: The relationship between sea levels and ice volumes during the
Last Interglacial Earth Planet. Sci Lett., 315-316, 4-11, doi:10.1016/.

epsl.201 1.08.026.

Lambeck, K., C. Smither and P. Johnston, 1998: Sea level change, glacial
rebound and mantle viscosity fornorthern Europe. Geophys. £ Int., 134(1),
102-144, doi:10.1046/.1365-246x.1998.00541.x.

Lamoureux, S. et al., 2015: The impact of climate change on infrastructure in
the western and central Canadian Arctic. In: From Science to Policy in the
Western and Central Canadian Arctic: an Integrated Regional Impact Study
(IRIS) of Climate Change and Modernization (Stern, G.A. and A. Gaden
(eds.}]. ArcticNet, Quebec, pp. 300-341.

Landais, A. et al., 2016: How warm was Greenland during the last interglacial
period? Clim. Past, 12(9), 1933-1948, doi:10.5194/cp-12-1933-2016.

Lantuit, H. et al., 2011: Coastal erosion dynamics onthe permafrost-dominated
Bykovsky Peninsula, north Siberia, 1951-2006. Polar Res., 30(1), 7341.

Larour, E., E.R. Ivins and S. Adhikari, 2017: Should coastal planners have
concern over where land ice is melting? Sci Adv., 3(11), e1700537.

Larour, E. et al, 2019: Slowdown in Antarctic mass loss from solid Earth and
sea level feedbacks. Science, 364(6444), doi:10.1126/science.aav7908.

Larsen, J.N. et al, 2014: Polar regions. In Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability Part B: Regional Aspects Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change [Barros, V.R. et al. (eds.)], Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 1567-1612.

Lauterjung, J. et al, 2017: 10 Years Indonesian Tsunami Early Warning
System: Experiences, Lessons Learned and Outlook [Lauterjung, J. and
H. Letz (eds.)]. GFZ German Research Centre for Geosciences Potsdam,
Germany, 68-pp. [Available at: http://gfzpublic.gfz-potsdam.de/pubman/
item/escidoc:2431901:13/component/escidoc:2469889/10_years_
InaTEWS_2431901.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/201.

Lavery, PS., M.A. Mateo, 0. Serrano and M. Rozaimi, 2013: Variability in
the Carbon Storage of Seagrass Habitats and Its Implications for Global
Estimates of Blue Carbon Ecosystem Service. PLoS One, 8(9}, 1-12,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0073748.

Lawrence, J. et al., 2018: National guidance for adapting to coastal hazards
and sea level rise: Anticipating change, when and how to change pathway.
Environ. Sci. Policy, 82, 100-107.

Lawrence, J., R. Bell and A. Stroombergen, 2019: A Hybrid Process to Address
Uncertainty and Changing Climate Risk in Coastal Areas Using Dynamic
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Adaptive Pathways Planning, Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis & Real
Options Analysis: A New Zealand Application. Sustainability, 11(2), 406.
Lawrence, J. and M. Haasnoot, 2017: What it took to catalyse uptake
of dynamic adaptive pathways planning to address climate change

uncertainty. Environ. Sci Policy, 68, 47-57.

Lawrence, J. et al, 2015: Adapting to changing climate risk by local
government in New Zealand: institutional practice barriers and enablers.
Local Environ., 20(3), 298-320.

Laws, D., D. Hogendoorn and H. Karl, 2014: Hot adaptation: what conflict
can contribute to collaborative natural resource management. Ecol Soc.,
19(2}, 1-9.

Lazeroms, W.M., A. Jenkins, G.H. Gudmundsson and R.S. van de Wal, 2018:
Modelling present-day basal melt rates for Antarctic ice shelves using a
parametrization of buoyant meltwater plumes. The Cryosphere, 12(1}, 49.

Lazrus, H., 2015: Risk perception and climate adaptation in Tuvalu: a combined
cultural theory and traditional knowledge approach. Hum. Organ., 74(1),
52-61.

Le Bars, D., S. Drijfhout and H. De Vries, 2017: A high-end sea level rise
probabilistic projection including rapid Antarctic ice sheet mass loss.
Environ. Res. Lett., 12(4), doi:10.1088/1 748-9326/aa6512.

Le Cozannet, G. et al., 2014: Approaches to evaluate the recent impacts of sea
level rise on shoreline changes. Earth-Sci. Rev., 138, 47-60.

Le Cozannet, G., J.-C. Manceau and J. Rohmer, 2017: Bounding probabilistic
sea level projections within the framework of the possibility theory.
Environ. Res. Lett., 12(1), 014012.

Leal Filho, W. et al, 2018: Fostering coastal resilience to climate change
vulnerability in Bangladesh, Brazil, Cameroon and Uruguay: a cross-country
comparison. Mitig. Adapt. Strat. GL, 23(4), 579-602.

Leck, H. and D. Roberts, 2015: What lies beneath: understanding the invisible
aspects of municipal climate change governance. Curr. Opin. Environ.
Sustain., 13, 61-67.

Leclercq, PW., J. Oerlemans and J.G. Cogley, 2011: Estimating the glacier
contribution to sea level rise for the period 1800-2005. Surv. Geophys.,
32(4-5), 519.

Lee, S.B., M. Li and F. Zhang, 2017: Impact of sea level rise on tidal range in
Chesapeake and Delaware Bays. / Geophys. Res-Oceans, 122(5), 3917-3938.

Lee, T.M. et al, 2015: Predictors of public climate change awareness and risk
perception around the world. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(11), 1014-1020.

Lee, Y., 2014: Coastal Planning Strategies for Adaptation to Sea Level Rise: A
Case Study of Mokpo, Korea. / Building Construct. Plan. Res. , 2(01}, 74-81.

Lefale, PF, 2010: Ua ‘afa le Aso Stormy weather today: traditional ecological
knowledge of weather and climate. The Samoa experience. Clim. Change,
100(2}, 317-335.

Lefcheck, J.S. et al, 2017: Multiple stressors threaten the imperiled coastal
foundation species eelgrass (Zostera marina) in Chesapeake Bay,
USA. Global Change Biol., 23(9), 3474-3483.

Lefebvre, J.-P. et al, 2012: Seasonal variability of cohesive sediment
aggregation in the Bach Dang-Cam Estuary, Haiphong (Vietnam).
Geo-Marine Letters, 32(2), 103-121.

Legeais, J.-F. et al., 2018: An improved and homogeneous altimeter sea level record
from the ESA Climate Change Initiative. Earth Syst. Sc. Data, 10, 281-301.
Lehmann, P. et al, 2015: Barriers and opportunities for urban adaptation
planning: analytical framework and evidence from cities in Latin America

and Germany. Mitig. Adapt. Strat. Gi, 20(1), 75-97.

Lei, Y. et al, 2017: Using Government Resettlement Projects as a Sustainable
Adaptation Strategy for Climate Change. Sustainability, 9(8), 1373.

Lemke, P. et al, 2007: Observations: Changes in Snow, Ice and Frozen Ground.
In Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of
Working Group | to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change. [Solomon S. et al. (eds.)], Cambridge University
Press Cambridge, UK, pp. 337-383.

Lempert, R. et al., 2013: Ensuring Robust Flood Risk Management in Ho Chi
Minh City. The World Bank Sustainable Development Network. [Available at:

Chapter 4

www.researchgate.net/publication/255698092_Ensuring_Robust_Flood_
Risk_Management_in_Ho_Chi_Minh_City]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Lempert, R. and M. Schlesinger, 2001: Climate-change strategy needs to be
robust. Nature, 412(6845), 375-375, doi:10.1038/35086617.

Lempert, R. and M.E. Schlesinger, 2000: Robust strategies for abating climate
change. Clim. Change, 45, 387-401.

Lenaerts, J. et al., 2016: Meltwater produced by wind-albedo interaction
stored in an East Antarctic ice shelf. Nat. Clim. Change, 7(1), 58.

Lenk, S. et al, 2017: Costs of sea dikes—regressions and uncertainty estimates.
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci, 17(5), 765-779.

Lentz, E.E. et al, 2016: Evaluation of dynamic coastal response to sea level
rise modifies inundation likelihood. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(7), 696-700.

Leonard, S., M. Parsons, K. Olawsky and F. Kofod, 2013: The role of culture and
traditional knowledge in climate change adaptation: Insights from East
Kimberley, Australia. Global Environ. Chang., 23(3), 623-632.

Leuliette, E.W., 2015: The balancing of the sea level budget. Curr. Clim., 1(3),
185-191.

Levermann, A. et al, 2013: The multimillennial sea level commitment of global
warming. PNAS, 110(34), 13745-13750, doi:10.1073/pnas.1219414110.
Levermann, A. et al, 2014: Projecting Antarctic ice discharge using response

functions from SeaRISE ice sheet models. Farth Syst. Dyn., 5(2), 271.

Lewis, R.R., 2001: Mangrove restoration-Costs and benefits of successful
ecological restoration. In: Proceedings of the Mangrove Valuation
Workshop, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Penang, Malaysia, Beijer
International Institute of Ecological Economics, pp. 4-8.

Li, X., J.P. Liu, ¥. Saito and V.L. Nguyen, 2017: Recent evolution of the Mekong
Delta and the impacts of dams. Farth-Sci. Rev., 175, 1-17.

Li, X. et al, 2015: Grounding line retreat of Totten Glacier, East Antarctica,
1996 to 2013. Geophys. Res. Lett., 42(19), 8049-8056.

Li, X., E. Rignot, J. Mouginot and B. Scheuchl, 2016: Ice flow dynamics and
mass loss of Totten Glacier, East Antarctica, from 1989 to 2015. Geophys.
Res, Lett, 43(12}, 6366-6373.

Li, Y. et al, 2014: Coastal wetland loss and environmental change due to rapid
urban expansion in Lianyungang, Jiangsu, China. Reg. Environ. Change,
14(3), 1175-1188.

Lickley, M.J., C.C. Hay, M.E. Tamisiea and JX. Mitrovica, 2018: Bias in
estimates of global mean sea level change inferred from satellite altimetry.
JL Clim., 31(13), 5263-5271.

Lidstrém, S., 2018: Sea level rise in public science writing: history, science and
reductionism. Environ. Commun., 12(1), 15-27.

Lilai, X., H. Yuanrong and H. Wei, 2016: A multi-dimensional integrated
approach to assess flood risks on a coastal city, induced by sea level rise
and storm tides. Environ. Res. Lett, 11(1), 014001.

Lin, Il. et al, 2009: Warm ocean anomaly, air sea fluxes, and the rapid
intensification of tropical cyclone Nargis (2008). Geophys. Res. Lett., 36(3),
1-5, doi:10.1029/2008GL035815.

Lin, N. and K. Emanuel, 2015: Grey swan tropical cyclones. Nat. Clim. Change,
6(1), 106-111, doi:10.1038/nclimate2777.

Lin, N., R.E. Kopp, B.P. Horton and J.P. Donnelly, 2016: Hurricane Sandy's flood
frequency increasing from year 1800 to 2100. PNAS, 113(43), 12071-12075.

Lin, N. and E. Shullman, 2017: Dealing with hurricane surge flooding in
a changing environment: part I. Risk assessment considering storm
climatology change, sea level rise, and coastal development. Stoch. Env.
Res, Risk A., 31(9), 2379-2400, doi:10.1007/s00477-016-1377-5.

Lincke, D. and J. Hinkel, 2018: Economically robust protection against 21st
century sea level rise. Global Environ. Chang., 51, 67-73.

Linh, L.H. et al., 2012: Molecular breeding to improve salt tolerance of rice
(Oryza sativa L.} in the Red River Delta of Vietnam. int. 4 Plant Genom,
2012, 1-9.

Linham, M., C. Green and R. Nicholls, 2010: AVOID Report on the Costs of
adaptation to the effects of climate change in the world’s large port cities.
AVWS2. Available at: www.avoid.uk.net/2010/07/avoid-1 -costs-of-adapta
tion-to-the-effects-of-climate-change-in-the-worlds-large-port-cities/

429

 
 

Chapter 4

Linham, M. and R. J. Nicholls, 2010: Technologies for Climate Change
Adaptation: Coastal Erosion and Flooding [Zhu, X. (ed.)]. TNA Guidebook
Series, UNEP Riso Centre on Energy, Climate and Sustainable Development
Publishing, M.C., Roskilde, Denmark [Available at: www.researchgate.
net/publication/216584246_Technologies_for_Climate_Change_
Adaptation_-_Coastal_Erosion_and_Flooding]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Lipscomb, W.H. et al, 2013: Implementation and initial evaluation of the
glimmer community ice sheet model in the community earth system model.
J Clim., 26(19), 7352-7371.

Little, C.M. et al, 2015a: Joint projections of US East Coast sea level and
storm surge. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(12), 1114-1120.

Little, C.M. et al, 2015b: Uncertainty in twenty-first-century CMIP5 sea level
projections. J. Clim., 28(2), 838-852.

Little, C.M., N.M. Urban and M. Oppenheimer, 2013: Probabilistic framework
for assessing the ice sheet contribution to sea level change. PNAS, 110(9),
3264-3269.

Liu, B., ¥.L. Siu and G. Mitchell, 2016a: Hazard interaction analysis for
multi-hazard risk assessment: a systematic classification based on
hazard-forming environment. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 16(2), 629.

Liu, H., J.G. Behr and R. Diaz, 2016b: Population vulnerability to storm surge
flooding in coastal Virginia, USA. Integr. Environ. Assess., 12(3), 500-509.

Liu, J.P. et al, 2017a: Stratigraphic formation of the Mekong River Delta and
its recent shoreline changes. Oceanography, 30(3), 72-83.

Liu, X. et al, 2017b: Effects of salinity and wet-dry treatments on C and N
dynamics in coastal-forested wetland soils: Implications of sea level rise.
Soil Biol Biochem., 112, 56-67.

Lo, AY., B. Xu, FK. Chan and R. Su, 2015: Social capital and community
preparation for urban flooding in China. Appi Geogr, 64, 1-11.

Lo, V., 2016: Synthesis report on experiences with ecosystem-based
approaches to climate change adaptation and disaster risk reduction,
Technical Series no. 85, Secretariat of the Conservation on Biological
Diversity, Montreal, Canada, 1-110, ISBN: 9789292256432.

Loder, N., J.L. Irish, M. Cialone and T. Wamsley, 2009: Sensitivity of hurricane
surge to morphological parameters of coastal wetlands. Fstuar Coast.
Shelf Sci., 84(4), 625-636.

Logan, J.R., S. Issar and Z. Xu, 2016: Trapped in Place? Segmented Resilience to
Hurricanes in the Gulf Coast, 1970-2005. Demography, 53(5), 1511-1534.

Lovelock, C.E. et al., 2015: The vulnerability of Indo-Pacific mangrove forests
to sea level rise. Nature, 526(7574), 559-563.

Lowe, J.A. and J.M. Gregory, 2006: Understanding projections of sea level
rise in a Hadley Centre coupled climate model. £ Geophys. Res-Oceans,
111(C11).

Luijendijk, A. et al, 2018: The State of the World's Beaches. Nature Sci. Rep.,
8, 1-11.

Lujala, P., H. Lein and J.K. Red, 2015: Climate change, Nat. Hazards, and risk
perception: the role of proximity and personal experience. Loca/ Environ.,
20(4), 489-509.

Lund, D.H., 2018: Governance innovations for climate change adaptation in
urban Denmark. 4 Environ. Pol. Plan., 20(5), 632-644.

Luo, X. et al., 2017: New evidence of Yangtze delta recession after closing of
the Three Gorges Dam. Sci Rep., 7, 41735.

Lusthaus, J, 2010: Shifting sands: sea level rise, maritime boundaries and
inter-state conflict. Politics, 30(2), 113-118.

Ma, Y., C.S. Tripathy and J.N. Bassis, 2017: Bounds on the calving cliff height of
marine terminating glaciers. Geophys. Res. Lett., 44(3), 1369-1375.

Macayeal, D.R. and 0.V. Sergienko, 2013: The flexural dynamics of melting ice
shelves. Ann. Glaciol, 54(63), 1-10, doi:10.3189/2013A0G63A256.

Magnan, A. et al., 2016: Addressing the risk of maladaptation to climate
change. WiRes. Clim. Change, 7(5), 646-665.

Magnan, A.K. and V.K.E. Duvat, 2018: Unavoidable solutions for coastal
adaptation in Reunion Island (Indian Ocean). Environ. Sci. Policy, 89, 393-
400, doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2018.09.002.

430

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Maina, J. et al., 2016: Integrating social-ecological vulnerability assessments
with climate forecasts to improve local climate adaptation planning for coral
reef fisheries in Papua New Guinea. Reg. Environ. Change, 16(3), 881-891.

Maldonado, J.K., 2015: Everyday practices and symbolic forms of resistance:
adapting to environmental change in coastal Louisiana. In: Hazards, Risks
and Disasters in Society. Elsevier, pp. 199-216, ISBN: 978-0-12-396451-9.

Maldonado, J.K. et al., 2013: The impact of climate change on tribal
communities in the US: displacement, relocation, and human rights. Clim.
Change, 120(3), 601-614.

Mann, M.E. and K.A. Emanuel, 2006: Atlantic hurricane trends linked to
climate change. Fos, 87(24), 233-241, doi:10.1029/2006E0240001.

Mantyka-Pringle, C.S.,T.G. Martin and J.R. Rhodes, 201 3: Interactions between
climate and habitat loss effects on biodiversity: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Global Change Biol, 19(5), 1642-1644, doi:10.1111/
gcb.12148.

Marba, N. and C.M. Duarte, 2010: Mediterranean warming triggers seagrass
(Posidonia oceanica) shoot mortality. Globa/ Change Biol, 16(8), 2366-2375.

Marchau, V.A.W.J., W.E. Walker, P.LT.M. Bloemen and S. Popper, (eds}.,
2019: Decision Making under Deep Uncertainty. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 1-401, ISBN: 9783030052522.

Marcos, M. and A. Amores, 2014: Quantifying anthropogenic and natural
contributions to thermosteric sea level rise. Geophys. Res. Lett., 41(7),
2502-2507, doi:10.1002/2014GL059766.

Marcos, M., EM. Calafat, A. Berihuete and S. Dangendorf, 2015: Long-term
variations in global sea level extremes. 4 Geophys. Res-Oceans, 120(12),
8115-8134.

Marengo, J.A., F Muller-Karger, M. Pelling and C.J. Reynolds, 2019: The
METROPOLE Project-An Integrated Framework to Analyse Local Decision
Making and Adaptive Capacity to Large-Scale Environmental Change:
Decision Making and Adaptation to Sea Level Rise in Santos, Brazil. In:
Climate Change in Santos Brazil: Projections, Impacts and Adaptation
Options [Hidalgo Nunes, L., R. Greco and J.A. Marengo (eds.)]. Springer, pp.
3-15, ISBN: 978-3-319-96534-5, 285-pp.

Marino, E., 2012: The long history of environmental migration: Assessing
vulnerability construction and obstacles to successful relocation in
Shishmaref, Alaska. Global Environ. Chang., 22(2), 374-381.

Marino, E. and H. Lazrus, 2015: Migration or forced displacement?: the
complex choices of climate change and disaster migrants in Shishmaref,
Alaska and Nanumea, Tuvalu. Hum. Organ., (2015), 341-350.

Mariotti, G. and J. Carr, 2014: Dual role of salt marsh retreat: Long-term loss
and short-term resilience. Water Resourc. Res., 50(4), 2963-2974.

Marsooli, R., P.M. Orton, N. Georgas and AF Blumberg, 2016:
Three-dimensional hydrodynamic modeling of coastal flood mitigation by
wetlands. Coast. Eng. J, 111, 83-94.

Martinez, M.L, G.  Mendoza-Gonzalez, R.  Silva-Casarin and
E. Mendoza-Baldwin, 2014: Land use changes and sea level rise may
induce a “coastal squeeze” on the coasts of Veracruz, Mexico. Global
Environ. Chang., 29, 180-188.

Martinez-Boti, M.A. et al, 2015: Plio-Pleistocene climate sensitivity evaluated
using high-resolution CO2 records. Nature, 518(7537), 49.

Maryland DEP, 2013: New Tidal Wetland Regulations for Living Shorelines.
1-10. Available at: https://mde.state.md.us/programs/Water/Wetlandsand
Waterways/Documents/www.mde.state.md.us/assets/document/
wetlandswaterways/Living%20Shoreline%20Regulations. Final. Effective%
2002-04-13. pdf.

Marzeion, B., J.G. Cogley, K. Richter and D. Parkes, 2014: Attribution of global
glacier mass loss to anthropogenic and natural causes. Science, 345(6199),
919-921.

Marzeion, B., A. Jarosch and M. Hofer, 2012: Past and future sea level change
from the surface mass balance of glaciers. The Cryosphere, 6(6}, 1295.

Marzeion, B., P. Leclercq, J. Cogley and A. Jarosch, 2015: Brief Communication:
Global reconstructions of glacier mass change during the 20th century are
consistent. The Cryosphere, 9(6), 2399-2404.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Marzeion, B. and A. Levermann, 2014: Loss of cultural world heritage and
currently inhabited places to sea level rise. Environ. Res. Lett., 9(3), 034001.

Masselink, G. and R. Gehrels, 2015: Coasta/ Environments and Global Change,
Hoboken, NJ, USA, pp. 432, ISBN: 9781119117261.

Massom, R.A. et al, 2018: Antarctic ice shelf disintegration triggered by
sea ice loss and ocean swell. Nature, 558(7710), 383-389, doi:10.1038/
s41586-018-0212-1.

Masson-Delmotte, V. et al., 2013: Information from Palaeoclimate Archives. In:
Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis: Contribution of Working
Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. [Stocker, T.F, D. Qin, G.K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen,
J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Masterson, J.P et al., 2014: Effects of sea-level rise on barrier island
groundwater system — dynamics—ecohydrological implications.
Ecohydrology, 7(3), 1064-1071.

Matin, N., J. Forrester and J. Ensor, 2018: What is equitable resilience? World
Dev., 109, 197-205.

Maxwell, PS. et al. 2015: Identifying habitats at risk: simple models can reveal
complex ecosystem dynamics. Ecol Appl, 25(2), 573-587, doi:10.1890/14-
0395.1.

Mayer-Pinto, M., M.G. Matias and R.A. Coleman, 2016: The interplay between
habitat structure and chemical contaminants on biotic responses of benthic
organisms. Peer/, 4, €1985-e1985, doi:10.7717/peerj.1985.

Mazda, Y., M. Magi, M. Kogo and P.N. Hong, 1997: Mangroves as a coastal
protection from waves in the Tong King delta, Vietnam. Mangroves and
Salt Marshes, 1(2), 127-135.

Mazeka, B., Sutherland, C., Buthelezi, S., Khumalo, D., 2019: Community-Based
Mapping Methodology for Climate Change Adaptation: A Case Study
of Quarry Road West Informal Settlement, Durban, South Africa. In: The
Geography of Climate Change Adaptation in Urban Africa [Cobbinah,
PB. and M. Addaney (eds.)]. Palgrave McMillan, Cham, pp. 57-88, ISSN:
9783030048730.

Mazzei, V. and E. Gaiser, 2018: Diatoms as tools for inferring ecotone
boundaries in a coastal freshwater wetland threatened by saltwater
intrusion. Ecol. indic., 88, 190-204, doi:10.1016/j.ecolind.2018.01.003.

McAdam, J. and E. Ferris, 2015: Planned relocations in the context of climate
change: unpacking the legal and conceptual issues. Cambridge J. Intl &
Comp. L., 4, 137.

McCarthy, G.D. et al, 2015: Ocean impact on decadal Atlantic climate
variability revealed by sea level observations. Nature, 521(7553), 508.

McCarthy, J.J. et al., (eds.), 2001: Climate change 2001: impacts, adaptation,
and vulnerability: contribution of Working Group II to the third assessment
report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.

McConnell, A., 2018: Rethinking wicked problems as political problems and
policy problems. Policy & Politics, 46(1), 165-180.

McCrea-Strub, A. et al., 2011: Understanding the cost of establishing marine
protected areas. Mar. Policy, 35(1), 1-9.

McCubbin, S., B. Smit and T. Pearce, 2015:Where does climate fit? Vulnerability
to climate change in the context of multiple stressors in Funafuti, Tuvalu.
Global Environ. Chang., 30, 43-55.

McDougall, C., 2017: Erosion and the beaches of Negril. Ocean Coast.
Manage, 148, 204-213.

McFadgen, B. and D. Huitema, 2018: Experimentation at the interface of
science and policy: a multi-case analysis of how policy experiments
influence political decision-makers. Policy Sciences, 51(2), 161-187.

McFarlin, J.M. et al, 2018: Pronounced summer warming in northwest
Greenland during the Holocene and Last Interglacial. PNAS, 115(25),
6357-6362, doi:10.1073/pnas.1720420115.

McGregor, S. et al, 2014: Recent Walker circulation strengthening and Pacific
cooling amplified by Atlantic warming. Nat. Clim. Change, 4(10), 888.

Chapter 4

Mclver, L. et al, 2015: Climate change, overcrowding and non-communicable
diseases: The ‘triple whammy’ of tuberculosis transmission risk in Pacific
atoll countries. Annals of the ACTM: An International Journal of Tropical
and Travel Medicine, 16(3), 57.

Mclvor, A., I. Moller, T. Spencer and M. Spalding, 2012a: Reduction of wind
and swell waves by mangroves (Natural Coastal Protection Series: Report
1. Cambridge Coastal Research Unit Working Paper 40). The Nature
Conservancy and Wetlands International, Cambridge, UK, ISSN: 2050-
7941, pp. 27.

Mclvor, A., T. Spencer, I. Méller and M. Spalding, 2012b: Storm surge
reduction by mangroves. Natural Coastal Protection Series, Cambridge
Coastal Research Unit, University of Cambridge, Conservancy, T.N.
and W. International [Available at: www.conservationgateway.org/
ConservationPractices/Marine/crr/library/Documents/storm-surg
e-reduction-by-mangroves-report.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Mclvor, A., T. Spencer, |. Moller and M. Spalding, 2013: The response
of mangrove soil surface elevation to sea level rise. Natural Coastal
Protection Series, Cambridge Coastal Research Unit, University of
Cambridge, Conservancy, T. N. and W. International [Available at: www.
conservationgateway.org/ConservationPractices/Marine/crr/library/
Documents/mangrove-surface-elevation-and-sea level-rise.pdf]. Accessed:
2019/09/20.

McKee, K.L. and W.C. Vervaeke, 2018: Will fluctuations in salt marsh-mangrove
dominance alter vulnerability of a subtropical wetland to sea level rise?
Global Change Biol, 24(3), 1224-1238, doi:10.1111/gcb.13945.

McKee, M., J. White and L. Putnam-Duhon, 2016: Simulated storm surge
effects on freshwater coastal wetland soil porewater salinity and
extractable ammonium levels: Implications for marsh recovery after storm
surge. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci, 181, 338-344.

McLean, R. and P. Kench, 2015: Destruction or persistence of coral atoll
islands in the face of 20th and 21st century sea-level rise? WiRes. Clim.
Change, 6(5), 445-463.

McLeman, R., 2018: Thresholds in climate migration. Popul Environ., 39(4),
319-338.

McMillen, H. et al, 2014: Small islands, valuable insights: systems of
customary resource use and resilience to climate change in the Pacific.
Ecol. Soc., 19(4), 1-17.

McNamara, K.E., R. Bronen, N. Fernando and S. Klepp, 2018: The complex
decision-making of climate-induced relocation: adaptation and loss and
damage. Clim. Policy, 18(1), 111-117.

Mcowen, C.J. et al, 2017: A global map of saltmarshes. Biodiversity data
journal, 5(e11764), 1-13.

Mechler, R. and L.M. Bouwer, 2015: Understanding trends and projections of
disaster losses and climate change: is vulnerability the missing link? Clim.
Change, 133(1), 23-35.

Meehl, G.A. et al, 2007: Global climate projections. In: Climate change 2007:
the physical science basis. Contribution of Working Group 1 to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,
[Solomon S., Q.D. Manning, M.Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor,
H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA.

Mees, H.L., C.J. Uittenbroek, D.L. Hegger and P.P. Driessen, 2019: From citizen
participation to government participation: A n exploration of the roles of
local governments in community initiatives for climate change adaptation
in the N etherlands. Environ. Policy Governance, 29, 198-208.

Mehring, P., H. Geoghegan, H.L. Cloke and J. Clark, 2018: What is going
wrong with community engagement? How flood communities and flood
authorities construct engagement and partnership working. Environ. Sci.
Policy, 89, 109-115.

Mehvar, S. et al., 2019: Climate change-driven losses in ecosystem services
of coastal wetlands: A case study in the West coast of Bangladesh. Ocean
Coast. Manage, 169, 273-283.

431

 
 

Chapter 4

Mei, W. and S.-P. Xie, 2016: Intensification of landfalling typhoons over the
northwest Pacific since the late 1970s. Nat. Geosci, 9(10), 753-757,
doi:10.1038/ngeo2792.

Melet, A., S. Legg and R. Hallberg, 2016: Climatic impacts of parameterized
local and remote tidal mixing. £ Clim., 29(10), 3473-3500.

Melet, A. and B. Meyssignac, 2015: Explaining the spread in global mean
thermosteric sea level rise in CMIP5 climate models. 4 Clim., 28(24),
9918-9940.

Melet, A., B. Meyssignac, R. Almar and G. Le Cozannet, 2018: Under-estimated
wave contribution to coastal sea level rise. Nat. Clim. Change, 1.

Melvin, A.M. et al, 2017: Climate change damages to Alaska public
infrastructure and the economics of proactive adaptation. PNAS, 114(2),
E122-E131.

Menéndez, P. et al., 2018: Valuing the protection services of mangroves at
national scale: The Philippines. Ecosyst. Serv., 34, 24-36.

Mengel, M. et al., 2016: Future sea level rise constrained by observations
and long-term commitment. PNAS, 113(10), 2597-2602, doi:10.1073/
pnas.1500515113.

Mengel, M., A. Nauels, J. Rogelj and C.-F. Schleussner, 2018: Committed sea
level rise under the Paris Agreement and the legacy of delayed mitigation
action. Nat. Commun., 9(1}, 601.

Mentaschi, L. et al., 2018: Global long-term observations of coastal erosion
and accretion. Sci Rep., 8(1), 12876.

Merkens, J.-L., L. Reimann, J. Hinkel andA.T. Vafeidis, 2016: Gridded population
projections for the coastal zone under the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways.
Global Planet. Change, 145, 57-66.

Metcalf, S.J. et al. 2015: Measuring the vulnerability of marine social-ecological
systems: a prerequisite for the identification of climate change adaptations.
Ecol Soc., 20(2), 1-21.

Meyer, M.A., 2018: Social capital in disaster research. In: Handbook of disaster
research (Rodriguez, H., W. Donner and J.E. Trainor (eds.)]. Springer, Cham,
Switzerland, pp. 263-286, ISBN: 978-3-319-63253-7.

Meyssignac, B., X. Fettweis, R. Chevrier and G. Spada, 2017a: Regional Sea
Level Changes for the Twentieth and the Twenty-First Centuries Induced by
the Regional Variability in Greenland Ice Sheet Surface Mass Loss. £ Clim.,
30(6), 2011-2028, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-16-0337.1.

Meyssignac, B. et al., 2017b: Causes of the regional variability in observed
sea level, sea surface temperature and ocean colour over the period 1993—
2011. Surv. Geophys., 38, 187-215.

Meyssignac, B. et al, 2017c: Evaluating model simulations of twentieth-
century sea level rise. Part Il: Regional sea level changes. J. Clim., 30(21),
8565-8593.

Michaelis, A.C., J. Willison, G.M. Lackmann and W.A. Robinson, 2017:
Changes in winter North Atlantic extratropical cyclones in high-resolution
regional pseudo-global warming simulations. 4 Clim., 30(17), 6905-6925,
doi:10.1175/JCLI-D-16-0697.1.

Milan, A. and S. Ruano, 2014: Rainfall variability, food insecurity and migration
in Cabrican, Guatemala. Clim. Dev., 6(1}, 61-68.

Milfont, T.L. et al., 2014: Proximity to coast is linked to climate change belief.
PLoS One, 9(7), e103180.

Milillo, P. et al., 2019: Heterogeneous retreat and ice melt of Thwaites Glacier,
West Antarctica. Sci Adv, 5(1), doi:10.1126/sciadv.aau3433.

Millan, R. et al, 2017: Bathymetry of the Amundsen Sea Embayment sector of
West Antarctica from Operation IceBridge gravity and other data. Geophys.
Res, Lett., 44(3), 1360-1368.

Miller, K.G. et al, 2012: High tide of the warm Pliocene: Implications of global
sea level for Antarctic deglaciation. Geology, doi:10.1130/g32869.1.

Millock, K., 2015: Migration and environment. Annu. Rev. Resour. Econ., 7,
35-60.

Mills, M. et al, 2016: Reconciling Development and Conservation under
Coastal Squeeze from Rising Sea Level. Conserv. Lett., 9(5), 361-368.

Milne, G.A. and J.X. Mitrovica, 2008: Searching for eustasy in deglacial sea
level histories. Quat. Sci Rev., 27(25-26), 2292-2302.

432

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Minister of Conservation, 2010: New Zealand Coastal Policy Statement.
New Zealand Department of Conservation, Team, D.o.C.P., Wellington,
New Zealand. 30-pp. [Available at: www.doc.govt.nz/Documents/
conservation/marine-and-coastal/coastal-management/nz-coasta
|-policy-statement-2010.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Mitrovica, J. et al, 2011: On the robustness of predictions of sea level
fingerprints. Geophys. £ Int., 187(2), 729-742.

Mitrovica, J., M.E. Tamisiea, J.L. Davis and G.A. Milne, 2001: Recent mass
balance of polar ice sheets inferred from patterns of global sea level
change. Nature, 409, 1026-1029, doi:10.1038/35059054.

Mitrovica, J.X. and G.A. Milne, 2003: On post-glacial sea level: I. General
theory. Geophys. J Int., 154(2), 253-267.

Moftakhari, H.R. et al, 2017: Compounding effects of sea level rise and fluvial
flooding. PNAS, 114(37), 9785-9790.

Moller, |. et al., 2014: Wave attenuation over coastal salt marshes under storm
surge conditions. Nat. Geosci,, 7(10), 727.

Moller, |. andT. Spencer, 2002: Wave dissipation over macro-tidal saltmarshes:
Effects of marsh edge typology and vegetation change. / Coast. Res.,
36(sp1), 506-521.

Monioudi, I.N. et al., 2018: Climate change impacts on critical international
transportation assets of Caribbean Small Island Developing States (SIDS):
the case of Jamaica and Saint Lucia. Reg. Environ. Change, 18(8), 1-15.

Moon, I.-J., S.-H. Kim, P. Klotzbach and J.C.L. Chan, 2015: Roles of interbasin
frequency changes in the poleward shifts of the maximum intensity location
of tropical cyclones. Environ. Res. Lett., 10(10), 1-9, doi:10.1088/1748-
9326/10/10/104004.

Moon, J.H., ¥.T. Song, P.D. Bromirski and A.J. Miller, 2013: Multidecadal
regional sea level shifts in the Pacific over 1958-2008. 4 Geophys.
Res-Oceans, 118(12), 7024-7035.

Moores, N., D.I. Rogers, K. Rogers and PM. Hansbro, 2016: Reclamation of
tidal flats and shorebird declines in Saemangeum and elsewhere in the
Republic of Korea. Emu., 116(2), 136-146.

Mooyaart, L. and S. Jonkman, 2017: Overview and Design Considerations of
Storm Surge Barriers. 4 Waterway Port Coast., 143(4), 06017001.

Morim, J. et al. 2018: On the concordance of 21st century wind-wave climate
projections. Global Planet. Change, 167, 160-171.

Moritz Kramer, M.M., A. Petrov, B. Glass, 2015: Storm Alert: Natural Disasters
Can Damage Sovereign Creditworthiness. Standard and Poor's Financial
Services LLC [Available at: https://unepfi.org/pdc/wp-content/uploads/
StormAlert.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Morlighem, M. et al, 2016: Modeling of Store Gletscher’s calving dynamics,
West Greenland, in response to ocean thermal forcing. Geophys. Res. Lett.,
43(6), 2659-2666, doi:10.1002/2016gl067695.

Morlighem, M. et al., 2014: Deeply incised submarine glacial valleys beneath
the Greenland ice sheet. Nat. Geasci., 7(6), 418-422.

Morlighem, M. et al., 2017: BedMachine v3: Complete bed topography and
ocean bathymetry mapping of Greenland from multibeam echo sounding
combined with mass conservation. Geophys. Res. Lett., 44(21), 11051-
11061, doi:10.1002/2017GL074954.

Morris, J.T., J. Edwards, S. Crooks and E. Reyes, 2012: Assessment of carbon
sequestration potential in coastal wetlands. In: Recarbonization of the
Biosphere. Springer, pp. 517-531.

Morrison, K., 2017: The Role of Traditional Knowledge to Frame Understanding of
Migration as Adaptation to the “Slow Disaster” of Sea Level Rise in the South
Pacific. In: Identifying Emerging Issues in Disaster Risk Reduction, Migration,
Climate Change and Sustainable Development. Springer, pp. 249-266.

Mortreux, C. et al., 2018: Political economy of planned relocation: A model
of action and inaction in government responses. Global Environ. Chang.,
50, 123-132.

Moser, S.C. and J.A. Ekstrom, 2010: A framework to diagnose barriers to
climate change adaptation. PNAS, 107(51), 22026-22031.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Moser, S.C., S. Jeffress Williams and D.F. Boesch, 2012: Wicked challenges at
land’s end: Managing coastal vulnerability under climate change. Annu.
Rev. Environ. Resourc., 37, 51-78.

Mouginot, J., E. Rignot and B. Scheuchl, 2014: Sustained increase in ice
discharge from the Amundsen Sea Embayment, West Antarctica, from
1973 to 2013. Geophys. Res. Lett., 41(5), 1576-1584.

MTA, 2017: MTA Announces Superstorm Sandy Recovery and Resiliency
Progress 5 Years After Storm. Metropolitan Transportation Authority, NY,
New York, USA. Available at: www.mta.info/news-mta-new-york-city-transi
t-bridges-tunnels/201 7/10/30/mta-announces-superstorm-sandy-recovery.

Mueller, V., C. Gray and K. Kosec, 2014: Heat stress increases long-term
human migration in rural Pakistan. Nat. Clim. Change, 4(3), 182.

Muis, S. et al., 2017: A comparison of two global datasets of extreme sea
levels and resulting flood exposure. Earth’s Future, 5(4), 379-392.

Muis, S. et al., 2016: A global reanalysis of storm surges and extreme sea
levels. Nat. Commun., 7, doi:10.1038/ncomms11969.

Mukul, S.A. et al, 2019: Combined effects of climate change and sea level rise
project dramatic habitat loss of the globally endangered Bengal tiger in
the Bangladesh Sundarbans. Sci. Total Environ., 663, 830-840.

Mulder, J.P, S. Hommes and E.M. Horstman, 2011: Implementation of coastal
erosion management in the Netherlands. Ocean Coast. Manage, 54(12),
888-897.

Mullin, M., M.D. Smith and D.E. McNamara, 2019: Paying to save the beach:
effects of local finance decisions on coastal management. Clim. Change,
152(2}, 275-289.

Munji, C.A. et al, 2013: Vulnerability to coastal flooding and response
strategies: the case of settlements in Cameroon mangrove forests. Environ.
Dev, 5, 54-72.

Murad, K.FI. et al., 2018: Conjunctive use of saline and fresh water increases
the productivity of maize in saline coastal region of Bangladesh. Agric.
Water Manage., 204, 262-270.

Musa, Z.N., |. Popescu and A. Mynett, 2016: Assessing the sustainability of
local resilience practices against sea level rise impacts on the lower Niger
delta. Ocean Coast. Manage, 130, 221-228.

Mycoo, M.A., 2018: Beyond 1.5 C: vulnerabilities and adaptation strategies
for Caribbean Small Island developing states. Reg. Environ. Change, 18(8),
2341-2353.

Myers, S.L., Revkin, A.C., Romero, S., Krauss, C., 2005: Old ways of life are
fading as the Arctic thaws. New York Times, Available at: www.nytimes.
com/2005/10/20/science/earth/old-ways-of-life-are-fading-as-the-arctic-
thaws. html

Nadzir, N.M., M. Ibrahim and M. Mansor, 2014: Impacts of coastal reclamation
to the quality of life: Tanjung Tokong community, Penang. Procedia-Social
and Behavioral Sciences, 153, 159-168.

Nairn, R. et al., 1999: Coastal Erosion at Keta Lagoon, Ghana—Large Scale
Solution to a Large Scale Problem. In: Coastal Engineering 1998 [Edge, B. L.
(ed.)]. American Society of Civil Engineers, 3192-3205.

Nakamura, J. et al, 2017: Western North Pacific Tropical Cyclone Model Tracks
in Present and Future Climates. £ Geophys. Res-Atmos., 122(18), 9721-
9744, doi:10.1002/2017JD02 7007.

Nakashima, D.J. et al, 2012: Weathering uncertainty: traditional knowledge
for climate change assessment and adaptation. UNESCO and UNU, Paris
and Darwin, 120-pp, ISBN: 978-92-3-001068-3.

Narayan, S. et al, 2016: The effectiveness, costs and coastal protection
benefits of natural and nature-based defences. PLoS One, 11(5), e0154735.

Narayan, S. et al, 2017: The Value of Coastal Wetlands for Flood Damage
Reduction in the Northeastern USA. Sci Rep., 7(1), 9463.

Nauels, A. et al., 2017a: Synthesizing long-term sea level rise projections—the
MAGICC sea level model v2. 0. Geasci, Model Dev., 10(6), 2495.

Nauels, A. et al, 2017b: Linking sea level rise and socioeconomic indicators
under the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways. Environ. Res. Lett., 12(11),
114002.

Chapter 4

Nawrotzki, R.J. and J. DeWaard, 2016: Climate shocks and the timing of
migration from Mexico. Popul. Environ., 38(1}, 72-100.

Nawrotzki, R.J., J. DeWaard, M. Bakhtsiyarava and J.T. Ha, 2017: Climate
shocks and rural-urban migration in Mexico: exploring nonlinearities and
thresholds. Clim. Change, 140(2), 243-258.

Naylor, A. K., 2015: Island morphology, reef resources, and development
paths in the Maldives. Progr. Phys. Geogr., 39(6), 728-749.

Neef, A. et al., 2018: Climate adaptation strategies in Fiji: The role of social
norms and cultural values. World Dev, 107, 125-137.

Nerem, R.S. et al., 2018: Climate-change—driven accelerated sea level rise
detected in the altimeter era. PNAS, 115(9), 2022-2025, doi:10.1073/
pnas. 1717312115.

Nerem, R.S., D.P. Chambers, C. Choe and G.T. Mitchum, 2010: Estimating
mean sea level change from the TOPEX and Jason altimeter missions. Mar.
Geod., 33(S1), 435-446.

Neumann, B., A.T. Vafeidis, J. Zimmermann and R.J. Nicholls, 2015: Future
coastal population growth and exposure to sea level rise and coastal
flooding-a global assessment. PLoS One, 10(3), €0118571.

Newig, J. and O. Fritsch, 2009: Environmental governance: participatory,
multi-level—and effective? Environ. Policy Governance, 19(3), 197-214.
Newton, A., T. J. Carruthers and J. Icely, 2012: The coastal syndromes and

hotspots on the coast. Fstuar. Coast. Shelf Sci., 96, 39-47.

Newton, A. and J. Weichselgartner, 2014: Hotspots of coastal vulnerability:
a DPSIR analysis to find societal pathways and responses. Estuar. Coast.
Shelf Sci, 140, 123-133.

Ngan, L.T. et al, 2018: Interplay between land use dynamics and changes in
hydrological regime in the Vietnamese Mekong Delta. Land use policy, 73,
269-280.

Ngo-Duc, T. et al, 2005: Effects of land water storage on global mean sea
level over the past half century. Geophys. Res. Lett., 32(9).

Nguyen, L.D., K. Raabe and U. Grote, 2015: Rural-urban migration, household
vulnerability, and welfare in Vietnam. World Dev., 71, 79-93.

Nhung, TT., P. Le Vo, V. Van Nghi and H.Q. Bang, 2019: Salt intrusion adaptation
measures for sustainable agricultural development under climate change
effects: A case of Ca Mau Peninsula, Vietnam. Clim. Risk Manage., 23,
88-100.

Nias, IJ, S.L. Cornford and A.J. Payne, 2016: Contrasting the modelled
sensitivity of the Amundsen Sea Embayment ice streams. 4 Glaciol,
62(233}, 552-562.

Nicholls, R.J, 2010: Impacts of and responses to sea-level rise. In:
Understanding sea level rise and variability, 17-51, [Church et al. (eds.}],
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, West Sussex, UK, ISBN: 9781444323276.

Nicholls, R.J., 2011: Planning for the Impacts of Sea Level Rise. Oceanography,
24(2), 144-157, doi:10.5670/oceanog.2011.34.

Nicholls, R.J., 2018: Adapting to Sea level Rise. In: Resilience: The Science
of Adaptation to Climate Change [Zommers, Z. and K. Alverson (eds.}].
Elsevier, Oxford, UK, pp. 13-29, ISBN: 978-0-12-811891-7.

Nicholls, R.J. and A. Cazenave, 2010: Sea level rise and its impact on coastal
zones. Science, 328 (5985), 1517-1520.

Nicholls, R.J., N.J. Cooper and I.H. Townend, 2007: The management of coastal
flooding and erosion. In: Future flooding and coastal erosion risks (Thorne,
C. (ed.)]. Thomas Telford, London, pp. 392-413, ISBN: 978-0-7277-3449-5.

Nicholls, R.J., R.J. Dawson and S.A. Day, (eds.), 2015: Broad Scale Coastal
Simulation. Springer, London, UK, 395-pp., ISBN: 978-94-007-5257-3.

Nicholls, R.J., D. Lincke, J. Hinkel and T. van der Pol, 2019: Global Investment
Costs for Coastal Defence Through the 21st Century. World Bank, Group,
W.B.G.S.D.P. [Available at: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/433
981550240622 188/pdf/WPS8745.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Nick, FM. et al, 2013: Future sea level rise from Greenland’s main outlet
glaciers in a warming climate. Nature, 497(7448), 235-238, doi:10.1038/
nature12068.

Nicolas, J.P. et al, 2017: January 2016 extensive summer melt in West
Antarctica favoured by strong El Nifio. Nat. Commun., 8, ncomms15799.

433

 
 

Chapter 4

Nidheesh, A. et al, 2013: Decadal and long-term sea level variability in the
tropical Indo-Pacific Ocean. Clim. Dyn., 41(2), 381-402.

Nilubon, P., W. Veerbeek and C. Zevenbergen, 2016: Amphibious Architecture
and Design: A Catalyst of Opportunistic Adaptation?—Case Study Bangkok.
Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 216, 470-480.

Nkoana, E., A. Verbruggen and J. Hugé, 2018: Climate change adaptation tools
at the community level: An integrated literature review. Sustainability,
10(3), 796.

Noél, B. et al, 2015: Evaluation of the updated regional climate model
RACMO2. 3: summer snowfall impact on the Greenland Ice Sheet. The
Cryosphere, 9(5), 1831-1844.

Noél, B. et al., 2017: A tipping point in refreezing accelerates mass loss of
Greenland’s glaciers and ice caps. Nat. Commun., 8, 14730, doi:10.1038/
ncomms14730.

Noél, B. et al., 2018: Modelling the climate and surface mass balance of polar
ice sheets using RACMO2-Part 1: Greenland (1958-2016). The Cryosphere,
12(3), 811-831.

Noh, S. et al, 2013: Influence of salinity intrusion on the speciation and
partitioning of mercury in the Mekong River Delta. Geochimica et
Cosmochimica Acta, 106, 379-390.

Nordstrom, K.F, C. Armaroli, N.L. Jackson and P. Ciavola, 2015: Opportunities
and constraints for managed retreat on exposed sandy shores: Examples
from Emilia-Romagna, Italy. Ocean Coast. Manage, 104, 11-21.

Noto, A.E. and J.B. Shurin, 2017: Early Stages of Sea level Rise Lead To
Decreased Salt Marsh Plant Diversity through Stronger Competition in
Mediterranean- Climate Marshes. PLoS One, 12(1), 1-11, doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0169056.

Nunn, P.D., W. Aalbersberg, S. Lata and M. Gwilliam, 2014: Beyond the core:
community governance for climate-change adaptation in peripheral parts
of Pacific Island Countries. Reg. Environ. Change, 14(1), 221-235.

Nunn, P.D., A. Kohler and R. Kumar, 201 7a: Identifying and assessing evidence
for recent shoreline change attributable to uncommonly rapid sea level
rise in Pohnpei, Federated States of Micronesia, Northwest Pacific Ocean.
J Coast. Conserv. 21(6), 719-730.

Nunn, P.D., J. Runman, M. Falanruw and R. Kumar, 2017b: Culturally grounded
responses to coastal change on islands in the Federated States of Micronesia,
northwest Pacific Ocean. Reg. Environ. Change, 17(4), 959-971.

Nurse, LA. et al, 2014: Small islands. In: Climate Change 2014:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change. [Barros, V.R., C.B. Field,
D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi,
Y.0. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken,
P.R. Mastrandrea and L L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Nursey-Bray, M., 2017: Towards socially just adaptive climate governance:
the transformative potential of conflict. Local Fnviron., 22(2), 156-171.
NYC, 2014: Retrofitting Buildings for Flood Risk. NYC Department of City
Planning, New York. [Available at: www1.nyc.gov/assets/planning/
download/pdf/plans-studies/retrofitting-buildings/retrofitting_complete.

pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

NYC, 2015: The City of New York CDBG-DR Action Plan Incorporating
Amendments 1-10. NYC Community Development Block Grant
Disaster Recovery. Available at: www1.nyc.gov/site/cdbgdr/action-plan/
action-plan.page.

NYC Mayor's Office of Recovery and Resiliency, 2019: Climate Resiliency
Design Guidelines. 3.0, Resiliency. New York Mayor's Office, New York, 66-
pp. [Available at: www1.nyc.gov/assets/orr/pdf/NYC_Climate_Resiliency_
Design_Guidelines_v3—0.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Nygren, A. and G. Wayessa, 2018: At the intersections of multiple
marginalisations: displacements and environmental justice in Mexico and
Ethiopia. Environmental Sociology, 4(1), 148-161.

434

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

O'Meara, TA., J.R. Hillman and S.F. Thrush, 2017: Rising tides, cumulative
impacts and cascading changes to estuarine ecosystem functions. Sci. Rep.,
7, 1-7, doi:10.1038/s41598-017-11058-7.

O'Neill, B.C. et al, 2017: IPCC reasons for concern regarding climate change
risks. Nat. Clim. Change, 7(1), 28.

O'Neill, E., F. Brereton, H. Shahumyan and J.P. Clinch, 2016: The Impact of
Perceived Flood Exposure on Flood-Risk Perception: The Role of Distance.
Risk Anal, 36(11), 2158-2186.

Oberlack, C., 2017: Diagnosing institutional barriers and opportunities for
adaptation to climate change. Mitig. Adapt. Strat. Gl, 22(5), 805-838.

Oberlack, C. and K. Eisenack, 2018: Archetypical barriers to adapting water
governance in river basins to climate change. Journal of Institutional
Economics, 14(3), 527-555.

Oberschall, A., 1978: Theories of social conflict. Annu. Rev. Sociol, 4(1),
291-315.

Oddo, PC. et al, 2017: Deep Uncertainties in Sea level Rise and Storm
Surge Projections: Implications for Coastal Flood Risk Management:
Deep Uncertainties in Coastal Flood Risk Management. Risk Anal, 1-16,
doi:10.111 1/risa. 12888.

OECD, 2019: Responding to Rising Seas. OECD Publishing, Paris, 176-pp.

Olsthoorn, X., P. van der Werff, L.M. Bouwer and D. Huitema, 2008:
Neo-Atlantis: The Netherlands under a 5-m sea level rise. Clim. Change,
91(1-2), 103-122.

Onaka, S. et al, 2017: Effectiveness of gravel beach nourishment on
Pacific Island. In: Asian And Pacific Coast 2017: Proceedings Of The 9th
International Conference On Apac 2017 [Suh, K.-D., E.C. Cruz and Y. Tajima
(eds.)]. 651-662, World Scientific, London, UK.

Onat, Y., O.P. Francis and K. Kim, 2018: Vulnerability assessment and
adaptation to sea level rise in high-wave environments: A case study on
O'ahu, Hawai'i. Ocean Coast. Manage, 157, 147-159.

Oppenheimer, M. and R.B. Alley, 2016: How high will the seas rise? Science,
354(6318), 1375-1377.

Oppenheimer, M. et al., 2014: Emergent risks and key vulnerabilities. In:
Climate Chagne 2014 Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability, 1039-1099,
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, ISBN: 9781107415379.

Ordéfiez, C. and P. Duinker, 2015: Climate change vulnerability assessment of
the urban forest in three Canadian cities. Clim. Change, 131(4), 531-543.

Osland, M.J. et al, 2017: Assessing coastal wetland vulnerability to sea level
rise along the northern Gulf of Mexico coast: Gaps and opportunities for
developing a coordinated regional sampling network. PLoS One, 12(9),
1-23, doi:10.1371/journal pone.0183431.

Otto, A. et al, 2013: Energy budget constraints on climate response. Nat.
Geosci., 6(6), 415-416, doi:10.1038/ngeo1836.

Ouillon, S., 2018: Why and How Do We Study Sediment Transport? Focus on
Coastal Zones and Ongoing Methods. Water, 10(4), 1-34.

Palanisamy, H., A. Cazenave, T. Delcroix and B. Meyssignac, 2015: Spatial
trend pattems in the Pacific Ocean sea level during the altimetry era: the
contribution of thermocline depth change and internal climate variability.
Ocean Dynam., 65(3), 341-356.

Palanisamy, H. et al., 2014: Regional sea level variability, total relative sea
level rise and its impacts on islands and coastal zones of Indian Ocean over
the last sixty years. Global Planet. Change, 116, 54-67.

Palmer, M. et al., 2010: Future observations for monitoring global ocean heat
content. In: Proceedings of OceanObs'09: Sustained Ocean Observations
and Information for Society, Venice, Italy, 1-13-pp.

Paolo, F.S., H.A. Fricker and L. Padman, 2015: Volume loss from Antarctic ice
shelves is accelerating. Science, 348(6232), 327-331.

Pappenberger, F. et al., 2015: The monetary benefit of early flood warnings in
Europe. Environ. Sci. Policy, 51, 278-291.

Paprocki, K. and S. Huq, 2018: Shrimp and coastal adaptation: on the politics
of climate justice. Clim. Dev., 10(1), 1-3.

Parizek, B.R. et al., 2019: Ice-cliff failure via retrogressive slumping. Geology,
47(5), 1-4, doi:10.1130 /G45880.1.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Parker, D.J., 2017: Risk Communication and Warnings, Risk Management,
Response, Floods, Preparedness. Natural Hazard Science, doi: 10.1093/
acrefore/97801 99389407.013.84.

Parkes, D. and B. Marzeion, 2018: Twentieth-century contribution to sea level
rise from uncharted glaciers. Nature, 563(7732), 551.

Pasquini, L., R. Cowling and G. Ziervogel, 2013: Facing the heat: Barriers to
mainstreaming climate change adaptation in local government in the
Western Cape Province, South Africa. Habitat Int., 40, 225-232.

Pasquini, L., G. Ziervogel, R.M. Cowling and C. Shearing, 2015: What enables
local governments to mainstream climate change adaptation? Lessons
learned from two municipal case studies in the Western Cape, South Africa.
Clim. Dev., 7(1), 60-70.

Passeri, D.L. et al, 2015: The dynamic effects of sea level rise on low-gradient
coastal landscapes: A review. Farth’s Future, 3(6), 159-181.

Paterson, S.K. et al, 2017: Size does matter: City scale and the asymmetries of
climate change adaptation in three coastal towns. Geoforum, 81, 109-119.

Patterson, M.O. et al, 2014: Orbital forcing of the East Antarctic ice sheet
during the Pliocene and Early Pleistocene. Nat. Geosci, 7, 841-847,
doi:10.1038/ngeo2273.

Pattyn, F, 2017: Sea level response to melting of Antarctic ice shelves on
multi-centennial timescales with the fast Elementary Thermomechanical
Ice Sheet model (f. ETISh v1. 0). The Cryosphere, 11(4), 1851-1878.

Pattyn, F. et al, 2013: Grounding-line migration in plan-view marine ice
sheet models: results of the ice2sea MISMIP3d intercomparison. J Glaciol,
59(215), 410-422.

Pattyn, F et al., 2018: The Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets under 1.5°C
global warming. Nat. Clim. Change, 8(12), 1053-1061, doi:10.1038/
s41558-018-0305-8.

Paul, M. and C. Amos, 2011: Spatial and seasonal variation in wave attenuation
over Zostera noltii. 1 Geophys. Res-Oceans, 116(C8).

Pearse, R., 2017: Gender and climate change. WiRes. Clim. Change, 8(2),
1-16.

Peduzzi, P., 2014: Sand, rarer than one thinks. Environ. Dev., 11, 208-218.

Peduzzi, P. et al, 2012: Global trends in tropical cyclone risk. Nat Clim.
Change, 2(4), 289-294, doi:10.1038/nclimate1 410.

Peltier, W., 2004: Global glacial isostasy and the surface of the ice-age earth:
the ICE-5G(VM2) model and GRACE. Annu. Rev. Earth Planet. Sci, 32,
111-149, doi:10.1146/annurev.earth.32.082503.144359.

Peltier, W., D. Argus and R. Drummond, 2015: Space geodesy constrains ice
age terminal deglaciation: The global ICE-6G_C (VM5a) model. . Geophys.
Res-Farth, 120(1), 450-487.

Pendleton, L. et al, 2016: Coral reefs and people in a high-CO2 world: Where
can science make a difference to people? PLoS One, 11(11), e0164699.
Perrette, M. et al, 2013:A scaling approach to project regional sea level rise and

its uncertainties. Earth Syst. Dyn., 4(1), 11-29, doi:10.5194/esd-4-11-2013.

Perry, C. and K. Morgan, 2017: Bleaching drives collapse in reef carbonate
budgets and reef growth potential on southern Maldives reefs. Sci Rep.,
7, 40581.

Perry, C.T. et al, 2018: Loss of coral reef growth capacity to track future
increases in sea level. Nature, 558(7710), 396.

Perry, C.T. et al, 2013: Caribbean-wide decline in carbonate production
threatens coral reef growth. Nat. Commun., 4, 1402.

Perumal, N., 2018: “The place where | live is where | belong”: community
perspectives on climate change and climate-related migration in the
Pacific island nation of Vanuatu. /si Stud. 4, 13(1), 45-64.

Peters, B.G., A. Jordan and J. Tosun, 2017: Over-reaction and under-reaction
in climate policy: An institutional analysis. £ Environ. Pol Plan., 19(6),
612-624.

Petzold, J., 2016: Limitations and opportunities of social capital for adaptation
to climate change: a case study on the Isles of Scilly. Geogr 4, 182(2),
123-134.

Chapter 4

Petzold, J., 2018: Social adaptability in ecotones: sea level rise and climate
change adaptation in Flushing and the Isles of Scilly, UK. /s/ Stud. 4, 13(1),
101-118.

Petzold, J. and A.K. Magnan, 2019: Climate change: thinking small islands
beyond Small Island Developing States (SIDS). Clim. Change, 152(1),
145-165.

Petzold, J. and B.M. Ratter, 2015: Climate change adaptation under a social
capital approach—An analytical framework for small islands. Ocean Coast.
Manage, 112, 36-43.

Pezzulo, C. et al., 2017: Sub-national mapping of population pyramids and
dependency ratios in Africa and Asia. Sci Data, 4, 170089.

Pfeffer, J. et al, 2017: Decoding the origins of vertical land motions observed
today at coasts. Geophys. J int., 210(1), 148-165.

Pfeffer, J., P. Tregoning, A. Purcell and M. Sambridge, 2018: Multitechnique
Assessment of the Interannual to Multidecadal Variability in Steric Sea
Levels: A Comparative Analysis of Climate Mode Fingerprints. 4 Clim.,
31(18), 7583-7597.

Pinsky, M.L., G. Guannel and K.K. Arkema, 2013: Quantifying wave
attenuation to inform coastal habitat conservation. Fcosphere, 4(8), 1-16.

Pinto, PJ., G.M. Kondolf and PL.R. Wong, 2018: Adapting to sea level rise:
Emerging governance issues in the San Francisco Bay Region. Environ. Sci.
Policy, 90, 28-37.

Pisaric, M.F. et al, 2011: Impacts of a recent storm surge on an Arctic delta
ecosystem examined in the context of the last millennium. PNAS, 108(22),
8960-8965.

Pittman, J. and D. Armitage, 2019: Network Governance of Land-Sea
Social-Ecological Systems in the Lesser Antilles. Ecol Econ., 157, 61-70.
Pollard, D. and R. DeConto, 2012: Description of a hybrid ice sheet-shelf

model, and application to Antarctica. Geosci, Model Dev., 5(5), 1273.

Pollard, D., R.M. DeConto and R.B. Alley, 2015: Potential Antarctic Ice Sheet
retreat driven by hydrofracturing and ice cliff failure. Farth Planet. Sci. Lett.,
412, 112-121.

Pollard, D., N. Gomez and R.M. Deconto, 2017: Variations of the Antarctic
Ice Sheet in a Coupled Ice Sheet-Earth-Sea Level Model: Sensitivity to
Viscoelastic Earth Properties. { Geophys. Res-Earth, 122(11), 2124-2138.

Pollard, J., T. Spencer and S. Brooks, 2018: The interactive relationship between
coastal erosion and flood risk. Progress in Physical Geography: Earth and
Environment, 43(4), 574-585.

Pontee, N., 2013: Defining coastal squeeze: A discussion. Ocean Coast.
Manage, 84, 204-207.

Pontee, N., S. Narayan, M.W. Beck and A.H. Hosking, 2016: Nature-based
solutions: lessons from around the world. Maritime Engineering, 169(1),
29-36.

Post, V.E. et al, 2018: On the resilience of small-island freshwater lenses:
Evidence of the long-term impacts of groundwater abstraction on Bonriki
Island, Kiribati. 4 Hydrol, 564, 133-148.

Pot, W. et al, 2018: What makes long-term investment decisions forward
looking: A framework applied to the case of Amsterdam's new sea lock.
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change, 132, 174-190.

Prahl, B.F. et al., 2018: Damage and protection cost curves for coastal floods
within the 600 largest European cities. Sci. Data, 5, 180034.

Primavera, J.H. and J.M.A. Esteban, 2008: A review of mangrove rehabilitation
in the Philippines: successes, failures and future prospects. Weti Fcol,
Manag., 16(5), 345-358.

Prisco, |., M. Carboni and A.T.R. Acosta, 2013: The Fate of Threatened Coastal
Dune Habitats in Italy under Climate Change Scenarios. PLoS One, 8(7),
1-14, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068850.

Pruitt, D., J. Rubin and S.H. Kim, 2003: Social Conflict: Escalation, Stalemate,
and Settlement (Third edition). McGraw-Hill Education, 316-pp,
McGraw-Hill, Boston, USA.

PSMSL, 2019: Tide Gauge Data. Permanent Service for Mean Sea Level.
Available at: www.psmslorg/

435

 
 

Chapter 4

Puotinen, M. et al, 2016: A robust operational model for predicting where
tropical cyclone waves damage coral reefs. Sci. Rep., 6, 26009.

Purkey, S.G. and G.C. Johnson, 2010: Warming of global abyssal and deep
Southern Ocean waters between the 1990s and 2000s: Contributions to
global heat and sea level rise budgets. J. Clim., 23(23), 6336-6351.

Quan, N.H. et al, 2018a: Conservation of the Mekong Delta wetlands through
hydrological management. Ecol. Res., 33(1), 87-103.

Quan, R. et al, 2018b: Improvement of Salt Tolerance Using Wild Rice Genes.
Front. Plant Sci., 8, 2269.

Quataert, E. et al, 2015: The influence of coral reefs and climate change on
wave-driven flooding of tropical coastlines. Geophys. Res. Lett., 42(15),
6407-6415.

Quiquet, A., C. Ritz, H.J. Punge and D. Salas y Mélia, 2013: Greenland ice
sheet contribution to sea level rise during the last interglacial period: a
modelling study driven and constrained by ice core data. Clim. Past, 9(1),
353-366, doi:10.5194/cp-9-353-2013.

Raby, A. et al., 2015: Implications of the 2011 Great East Japan Tsunami on
sea defence design. int. J Disast. Risk Reduc., 14, 332-346.

Radic, V. et al., 2014: Regional and global projections of twenty-first century
glacier mass changes in response to climate scenarios from global climate
models. Clim. Dyn., 42(1-2), 37-58.

Radic, V. and R. Hock, 2010: Regional and global volumes of glaciers derived
from statistical upscaling of glacier inventory data. 4 Geophys. Res-Farth,
115(F1), 1-10.

Rahman, M.A. and S. Rahman, 2015: Natural and traditional defense
mechanisms to reduce climate risks in coastal zones of Bangladesh.
Weather and Climate Extremes, 7, 84-95.

Rahman, M.M., Y. Jiang and K. Irvine, 2018: Assessing wetland services for
improved development decision-making: a case study of mangroves in
coastal Bangladesh. Weti. Ecol. Manag., 26(4), 563-580.

Rahman, M.S., 2013: Climate change, disaster and gender vulnerability: A
study on two divisions of Bangladesh. Am. 4 Hum. Ecol, 2(2}, 72-82.

Rahmstorf, $., 2007: A semi-empirical approach to projecting future sea level
rise. Science, 315(5810), 368-370.

Rakib, M., J. Sasaki, H. Matsuda and M. Fukunaga, 2019: Severe salinity
contamination in drinking water and associated human health hazards
increase migration risk in the southwestern coastal part of Bangladesh.
J Environ. Manage., 240, 238-248.

Rangel-Buitrago, N.G., G. Anfuso and A.T. Williams, 2015: Coastal erosion
along the Caribbean coast of Colombia: magnitudes, causes and
management. Ocean Coast. Manage, 114, 129-144.

Ranger, N., T. Reeder and J. Lowe, 2013: Addressing ‘deep’uncertainty over
long-term climate in major infrastructure projects: four innovations of the
Thames Estuary 2100 Project. EURO Journal on Decision Processes, 1(3—4),
2331262.

Ranson, M. et al., 2014: Tropical and extratropical cyclone damages under
climate change. Clim. Change, 127(2}, 227f241, doi:10.1007/s10584-
014-1255-4.

Rao, N.D., B.J. van Ruijven, K. Riahi and V. Bosetti, 2017: Improving poverty and
inequality modelling in climate research. Nat. Clim. Change, 7(12), 857.

Rasmussen, D. et al, 2018: Extreme sea level implications of 1.5°C, 2.0°C,
and 2.5°C temperature stabilization targets in the 21st and 22nd centuries.
Environ. Res. Lett., 13(3), 034040.

Raucoules, D. et al., 2013: High nonlinear urban ground motion in Manila
(Philippines) from 1993 to 2010 observed by DInSAR: implications for sea
level measurement. Remote Sens. Environ., 139, 386-397.

Ray, B.R., M.W. Johnson, K. Cammarata and D.L. Smee, 2014: Changes in
Seagrass Species Composition in Northwestern Gulf of Mexico Estuaries:
Effects on Associated Seagrass Fauna. PLoS One, 9(9), e107751-e107751,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0107751.

Ray, R.D. and B.C. Douglas, 2011: Experiments in reconstructing
twentieth-century sea levels. Progr. Oceanogr, 91(4), 496-515.

436

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Raymo, M.E. et al, 2018: The accuracy of mid-Pliocene [71180-based ice
volume and sea level reconstructions. Farth-Sci Rev, 177, 291-302,
doi:10.1016/j.earscirev.2017.11.022.

Raymo, M.E. et al, 2011: Departures from eustasy in Pliocene sea level
records. Nat. Geosci., 4(5), 328.

Reager, J.T. et al, 2016: A decade of sea level rise slowed by climate-driven
hydrology. Science, 351(6274), 699-703, doi:10.1126/science.aad8386.
Reed, M.S., 2008: Stakeholder participation for environmental management:

a literature review. Biol Conserv., 141(10), 2417-2431.

Reef, R. and C.E. Lovelock, 2014: Historical analysis of mangrove leaf traits
throughout the 19th and 20th centuries reveals differential responses to
increases in atmospheric CO2. Global Ecol. Biogeogr., 23(11), 1209-1214.

Reese, R. et al., 201 8a: Antarctic sub-shelf melt rates via PICO. The Cryosphere,
12(6), 1969-1985, doi:10.5194/tc-12-1969-2018.

Reese, R., G.H. Gudmundsson, A. Levermann and R. Winkelmann, 2018b: The
far reach of ice shelf thinning in Antarctica. Nat. Clim. Change, 8(1), 53.
Reese, R., R. Winkelmann and G.H. Gudmundsson, 2018c: Grounding-line
flux formula applied as a flux condition in numerical simulations fails for
buttressed Antarctic ice streams. The Cryosphere, 12(10), 3229-3242,

doi:10.5194/tc-12-3229-2018.

Regeneris Consulting, 2011: Coastal Pathfinder Evaluation: An Assessment of
the Five Largest Pathfinder Projects Department for Environment Food and
Rural Affairs, Affairs, London. [Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/69509/
pb13721-coastal-pathfinder-evaluation.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Reguero, B. et al, 2018a: Coral reefs for coastal protection: A new
methodological approach and engineering case study in Grenada.
4 Environ. Manage., 210, 146-161.

Reguero, B.G. et al, 2018b: Comparing the cost effectiveness of nature-based
and coastal adaptation: A case study from the Gulf Coast of the United
States. PLoS One, 13(4}, e0192132.

Reguero, B.G. et al., 2015: Effects of climate change on exposure to coastal
flooding in Latin America and the Caribbean. PLoS One, 10(7), 0133409.

Reiblich, J. et al., 2019: Bridging climate science, law, and policy to advance
coastal adaptation planning. Mar. Policy, 104, 125-134.

Reiblich, J., L. Wedding and E. Hartge, 2017: Enabling and Limiting Conditions
of Coastal Adaptation: Local Governments, Land Uses, and Legal
Challenges. Ocean Coast. Law J, 22(2), 156-194.

Reid, H., 2016: Ecosystem-and community-based adaptation: learning from
community-based natural resource management. Clim. Dev., 8(1), 4-9.
Renaud, F.G. et al., 2015: Resilience and shifts in agro-ecosystems facing
increasing sea level rise and salinity intrusion in Ben Tre Province, Mekong

Delta. Clim. Change, 133(1), 69-84.

Renaud, F.G., K. Sudmeier-Rieux, M. Estrella and U. Nehren, 2016:
Ecosystem-based disaster risk reduction and adaptation in practice.
Springer, Cham, Switzerland, 593-pp., IBSN: 978-3-3 19-43631-9.

Renaud, F.G. et al., 2013: Tipping from the Holocene to the Anthropocene:
How threatened are major world deltas? Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain., 5(6),
644-654.

Renn, 0., 2008: Risk governance: coping with uncertainty in a complex world.
Earthscan, Sterling, VA, USA, 445 pp., ISBN: 978-1-84407-291-0.

Renner, K. et al., 2017: Spatio-temporal population modelling as improved
exposure information for risk assessments tested in the Autonomous
Province of Bolzano. int. | Disast. Risk Reduc., 27, 470-479.

Repolha, T. et al, 2017: Seagrass ecophysiological performance under ocean
warming and acidification. Sci. Rep., 7, 41443.

Reuter, H.I.,A. Nelson and A. Jarvis, 2007:An evaluation of void-filling interpolation
methods for SRTM data. Int. £ Geogr: Info. Sci, 21(9), 983-1008.

RIBA and ICE, 2010: Facing-up to rising sea levels. Retreat? Defend? Attack?,
Royal Institute of British Architects; Institution of Civil Engineers, London
[Available at: https://tamug-ir.tdl. org/bitstream/handle/1969.3/29265/
Facing_Up_To_Rising_Sea_Levels.pdf?sequence=1 &isAllowed=y].
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Richards, D.R. and D.A. Friess, 2017: Characterizing Coastal Ecosystem Service
Trade-offs with Future Urban Development in a Tropical City. Environ.
Manage., 60(5), 961-973.

Rietbroek, R. et al., 2016: Revisiting the contemporary sea level budget on
global and regional scales. PNAS, 113(6), 1504-1509.

Rigall-I-Torrent, R. et al, 2011: The effects of beach characteristics and
location with respect to hotel prices. Tourism Manage. , 32(5), 1150-1158.

Rignot, E. et al, 2014: Widespread, rapid grounding line retreat of Pine Island,
Thwaites, Smith, and Kohler glaciers, West Antarctica, from 1992 to 2011.
Geophys. Res. Lett., 41(10), 3502-3509.

Rignot, E. et al, 2019: Four decades of Antarctic Ice Sheet mass balance from
1979-2017. Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(4),
1095-1103, doi:10.1073/pnas.1812883116.

Riser, S.C. et al, 2016: Fifteen years of ocean observations with the global
Argo array. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(2), 145.

Ritz, C. et al, 2015: Potential sea level rise from Antarctic ice sheet instability
constrained by observations. Nature, 528(7580), 115-118.

Riva, R.E. et al, 2017: Brief communication: The global signature of post-
1900 land ice wastage on vertical land motion. The Cryosphere, 11(3),
1327-1332.

Robinson, A., R. Calov and A. Ganopolski, 2012: Multistability and critical
thresholds of the Greenland ice sheet. Nat. Clim. Change, 2, 429-432,
doi:10.1038/nclimate1449 www.nature.com/articles/nclimate1449#suppl
ementary-information.

Robinson, S.-A., 2017: Climate change adaptation trends in small island
developing states. Mitig. Adapt. Strat. Gl, 22(4), 669-691.

Roeber, V. and J.D. Bricker, 2015: Destructive tsunami-like wave generated by
surf beat over a coral reef during Typhoon Haiyan. Nat. Commun., 6, 7854.

Roelvink, D., 2015: Addressing local and global sediment imbalances: coastal
sediments as rare minerals. In: The Proceedings of the Coastal Sediments
2015 (Wang, P,, J.D. Rosati and J. Cheng (eds.}]. World Scientific, London,
UK, ISBN: 978-981-4689-97-9.

Roemmich, D. et al, 2015: Unabated planetary warming and its ocean
structure since 2006. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(3), 240-245.

Rogers, K.G. and I. Overeem, 2017: Doomed to drown? Sediment dynamics in
the human-controlled floodplains of the active Bengal Delta. Elementa-Sci.
Anthrop. , 5(66}, 1-15, doi:10.1525/elementa.250.

Roggero, M., A. Bisaro and S. Villamayor-Tomas, 2018a: Institutions in the
climate adaptation literature: a systematic literature review through the
lens of the Institutional Analysis and Development framework. Journal of
Institutional Economics, 14(3), 423-448.

Roggero, M. et al., 2018b: Introduction to the special issue on adapting
institutions to climate change. Journal of institutional economics, 14(3),
409-422.

Rolph, R.J., A.R. Mahoney, J. Walsh and PA. Loring, 2018: Impacts of
a lengthening open water season on Alaskan coastal communities:
deriving locally relevant indices from large-scale datasets and community
observations. Cryosphere, 12(5), 1779-1790.

Romine, B.M. et al., 2013: Are beach erosion rates and sea level rise related in
Hawaii? Global Planet. Change, 108, 149-157.

Rosendg, S., L. Celliers and M. Mechisso, 2018: Doing more with the same:
A reality-check on the ability of local government to implement Integrated
Coastal Management for climate change adaptation. Mar. Policy, 87, 29-39.

Rosenzweig, C. and W. Solecki, 2014: Hurricane Sandy and adaptation
pathways in New York: lessons from a first-responder city. Global Environ.
Chang., 28, 395-408.

Ross, A.C. et al., 2015: Sea level rise and other influences on decadal-scale
salinity variability in a coastal plain estuary. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci, 157,
79-92.

Rosselld-Nadal, J., 2014: How to evaluate the effects of climate change on
tourism. Tourism Manage., 42, 334-340.

Rotzoll, K. and C.H. Fletcher, 2013: Assessment of groundwater inundation as
a consequence of sea level rise. Nat. Clim. Change, 3(5), 477.

Chapter 4

Rouse, H. et al, 2017: Coastal adaptation to climate change in Actearoa-New
Zealand. New Zeal 4 Mar. Fresh., 51(2), 183-222.

Rovere, A. et al, 2014: The Mid-Pliocene sea level conundrum: Glacial
isostasy, eustasy and dynamic topography. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 387,
27-33, doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2013.10.030.

Rowley, D.B. et al, 2013: Dynamic topography change of the eastern United
States since 3 million years ago. Science, 340(6140), 1560-1563.

Ruggiero, P., 2012: Is the intensifying wave climate of the US Pacific Northwest
increasing flooding and erosion risk faster than sea level rise? 4 Waterway
Port Coast., 139(2), 88-97.

Ruiz-Fernandez, A. et al, 2018: Carbon burial and storage in tropical salt
marshes under the influence of sea level rise. Sci Total Environ., 630,
1628-1640.

Rumanti, 1A. et al, 2018: Development of tolerant rice varieties for
stress-prone ecosystems in the coastal deltas of Indonesia. Field Crops
Research, 223, 75-82.

Rumore, D., 2014: Building the Capacity of Coastal Communities to Adapt to
Climate Change through Participatory Action Research. Carolina Planning,
39, 16-12.

Rumore, D., T. Schenk and L. Susskind, 2016: Role-play simulations for climate
change adaptation education and engagement. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(8), 745.

Runhaar, H. et al., 2018: Mainstreaming climate adaptation: taking stock
about “what works” from empirical research worldwide. Reg. Environ.
Change, 18(4)}, 1201-1210.

Rupprecht, F. et al, 2017: Vegetation-wave interactions in salt marshes under
storm surge conditions. Ecol. Eng., 100, 301-315.

Ryan, J.C. et al, 2018: Dark zone of the Greenland Ice Sheet controlled by
distributed biologically-active impurities. Nat Commun., 9(1), 1065,
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-03353-2.

Ryan, J.C. et al., 2019: Greenland Ice Sheet surface melt amplified by snowline
migration and bare ice exposure. Sci Adv., 5(3), eaav3738, doi:10.1126/
sciadv.aav3738.

Saenko, 0.A. et al., 2015: Separating the influence of projected changes in
air temperature and wind on patterns of sea level change and ocean heat
content. / Geophys. Res-Oceans, 120(8), 5749-5765.

Sagoe-Addy, K. and K.A. Addo, 2013: Effect of predicted sea level rise on
tourism facilities along Ghana's Accra coast. 4 Coast. Conserv., 17(1),
155-166.

Samper-Villarreal, J. et al, 2016: Organic carbon in seagrass sediments is
influenced by seagrass canopy complexity, turbidity, wave height, and
water depth. Limnol. Oceanogr., 61(3), 938-952, doi:10.1002/Ino.10262.

Sanchez-Garcia, E.A., K. Rodriguez-Medina and P. Moreno-Casasola, 2017:
Effects of soil saturation and salinity on seed germination in seven
freshwater marsh species from the tropical coast of the Gulf of Mexico.
Aquat. Bot., 140, 4-12.

Sanchez-Rodriguez, A.R. et al, 2017: Comparative effects of prolonged
freshwater and saline flooding on nitrogen cycling in an agricultural soil.
Appl Soil Ecol, 125, 56-70.

Santamaria-Gomez, A. et al., 2017: Uncertainty of the 20th century sea level
rise due to vertical land motion errors. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 473, 24-32.

Sarzynski, A., 2015: Public participation, civic capacity, and climate
change adaptation in cities. Urban Climate, 14, 52-67, doi:10.1016/j.
uclim.2015.08.002.

Sasmito, S.D., D. Murdiyarso, D.A. Friess and S. Kurnianto, 2016: Can mangroves
keep pace with contemporary sea level rise? A global data review. Weil.
Ecol. Manag., 24(2), 263-278.

Sattele, M., M. Briindl and D. Straub, 2015: Reliability and effectiveness of
early warning systems for Nat. Hazards: Concept and application to debris
flow warning. Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 142, 192-202.

Saunders, M.I. et al., 2013: Coastal retreat and improved water quality
mitigate losses of seagrass from sea level rise. Global Change Biol, 19(8),
2569-2583, doi:10.111 1/gcb.12218.

437

 
 

Chapter 4

Savage, L.J., 1951: The Theory of Statistical Decision. 4 Am. Stat. Assoc., 46,
55-67, doi:10.1080/01621459.1951.10500768.

Scambos, T.A., J. Bohlander, C.U. Shuman and P. Skvarca, 2004: Glacier
acceleration and thinning after ice shelf collapse in the Larsen B
embayment, Antarctica. Geophys. Res. Lett, 31(18).

Scambos, T.A. et al, 2009: Ice shelf disintegration by plate bending and
hydro-fracture: Satellite observations and model results of the 2008
Wilkins ice shelf break-ups. Farth Planet. Sci. Lett., 280(1-4), 51-60.

Scanlon, B.R. et al., 2018: Global models underestimate large decadal
declining and rising water storage trends relative to GRACE satellite data.
PNAS, 115(6), 1080-1089.

Schade, J. et al, 2015: Climate change and climate policy induced relocation:
a challenge for social justice. University Bielefeld, Centre on Migration,
Citizenship and Development. Available at: www.ssoar.info/ssoar/handle/
document/50741.

Schaeffer, M., W. Hare, $. Rahmstorf and M. Vermeer, 2012: Long-term sea
level rise implied by 1.5 C and 2°C warming levels. Nat. Clim. Change,
2(12), 867-870.

Scheffran, J., E. Marmer and P. Sow, 2012: Migration as a contribution to
resilience and innovation in climate adaptation: Social networks and
co-development in Northwest Africa. Appl, Geogr, 33, 119-127.

Schernewski, G., J. Schumacher, E. Weisner and L. Donges, 2018: A combined
coastal protection, realignment and wetland restoration scheme in the
southern Baltic: planning process, public information and participation.
J Coast. Conserv., 22(3), 533-547.

Scheuchl, B. et al., 2016: Grounding line retreat of Pope, Smith, and Kohler
Glaciers, West Antarctica, measured with Sentinel-1a radar interferometry
data. Geophys. Res. Lett., 43(16), 8572-8579.

Schile, L.M. et al, 2014: Modeling tidal marsh distribution with sea level rise:
Evaluating the role of vegetation, sediment, and upland habitat in marsh
resiliency. PLoS One, 9(2), 88760.

Schlegel, N.J. et al, 2018: Exploration of Antarctic Ice Sheet 100-year
contribution to sea level rise and associated model uncertainties using the
ISSM framework. The Cryosphere, 12(11), 3511-3534, doi:10.5194/tc-12-
3511-2018.

Schloesser, F., R. Furue, J. McCreary and A. Timmermann, 2014: Dynamics of
the Atlantic meridional overtuming circulation. Part 2: Forcing by winds
and buoyancy. Progr. Oceanogr., 120, 154-176.

Schlosberg, D., 2012: Climate justice and capabilities: a framework for
adaptation policy. Ethics & International Affairs, 26(4), 445-461.

Schlosberg, D., L.B. Collins and S. Niemeyer, 2017: Adaptation policy and
community discourse: risk, vulnerability, and just transformation. Environ.
Politics, 26(3), 413-437.

Schmidt, C.W., 2015: Delta subsidence: an imminent threat to coastal
populations. Environ Health Perspect, 123(8), A204-A209.

Schmitt, R., Z. Rubin and G. Kondolf, 2017: Losing ground-scenarios of land
loss as consequence of shifting sediment budgets in the Mekong Delta.
Geomorphology, 294, 58-69.

Schodlok, M.P., D. Menemenlis and E.J. Rignot, 2016: Ice shelf basal melt
rates around Antarctica from simulations and observations. £ Geophys.
Res-Oceans, 121(2), 1085-1109, doi:10.1002/2015JC011117.

Schoof, C., 2007a: Ice sheet grounding line dynamics: Steady states,
stability, and hysteresis. 4 Geophys. Res-Earth, 112(F3), 1-19,
doi:10.1029/2006JF000664.

Schoof, C., 2007b: Marine ice sheet dynamics. Part 1. the case of rapid sliding.
J. Fluid Mech., 573, 27-55, doi:10.1017/S0022112006003570.

Schoutens, K. et al, 2019: How effective are tidal marshes as nature-based
shoreline protection throughout seasons? Limnol, Oceanogr, 64, 1750-1762.

Schuerch, M. et al, 2018: Future response of global coastal wetlands to sea
level rise. Nature, 561(7722), 231.

Scoccimarro, E. et al, 2017: Tropical Cyclone Rainfall Changes in a Warmer
Climate. In: Hurricanes and Climate Change [Collins, J.M. and K. Walsh
(eds.)]. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 3, 243-255.

438

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Scussolini, P. et al, 2015: FLOPROS: an evolving global database of flood
protection standards. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci, Discuss, 3, 7275-309.
Scussolini, P. et al, 2017: Adaptation to Sea Level Rise: A Multidisciplinary
Analysis for Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. Water Resourc. Res., 53, 10841-

10857, doi:10.1002/2017WR021344.

Scyphers, S.B., J.S. Picou and S.P. Powers, 2015: Participatory conservation of coastal
habitats: the importance of understanding homeowner decision making to
mitigate cascading shoreline degradation. Conserv. Lett., 8(1), 41-49.

Scyphers, S.B., S.P. Powers, K.L. Heck Jr and D. Byron, 2011: Oyster reefs as
natural breakwaters mitigate shoreline loss and facilitate fisheries. PLoS
One, 6(8), 22396.

Seavitt, C., 2013: Yangtze river delta project. Scenario 03: Rethinking
Infrastructure. Available at: https://scenariojournal.com/article/yangtze-riv
er-delta-project/.

Sebesvari, Z. et al, 2016: A review of vulnerability indicators for deltaic
social-ecological systems. Sustain. Sci, 11(4), 575-590.

Sengupta, D., R. Chen and M.E. Meadows, 2018: Building beyond land: An
overview of coastal land reclamation in 16 global megacities. App! Geogr.,
90, 229-238.

Sérazin, G. et al, 2016: Quantifying uncertainties on regional sea level
change induced by multidecadal intrinsic oceanic variability. Geophys. Res.
Lett., 43(15), 8151-8159.

Seroussi, H. and M. Morlighem, 2018: Representation of basal melting at the
grounding line in ice flow models. The Cryosphere, 12(10), 3085-3096,
doi:10.5194/tc-12-3085-2018.

Seroussi, H. et al., 2017: Continued retreat of Thwaites Glacier, West
Antarctica, controlled by bed topography and ocean circulation. Geophys.
Res, Lett., 44(12), 6191-6199.

Serrano, 0., PS. Lavery, M. Rozaimi and M.A. Mateo, 2014: Influence of
water depth on the carbon sequestration capacity of seagrasses. Glob.
Biogeochem. Cy., 28(9), 950-961.

Serrao-Neumann, S. et al., 2015: Maximising synergies between disaster risk
reduction and climate change adaptation: Potential enablers for improved
planning outcomes. Environ. Sci. Policy, 50, 46-61.

Serre, D. and C. Heinzlef, 2018: Assessing and mapping urban resilience to
floods with respect to cascading effects through critical infrastructure
networks. /nt. / Disast. Risk Reduc., 30, 235-243.

Setzer, J. and L. Vanhala, 2019: Climate change litigation: a review of research on
courts and litigants in climate government. WiRes. Clim. Change. 10(3), 1-19.

Shakeela, A. and S. Becken, 2015: Understanding tourism leaders’ perceptions
of risks from climate change: An assessment of policy-making processes
in the Maldives using the social amplification of risk framework (SARF}.
J Sustain. Tourism, 23(1), 65-84.

Shakun, J.D. et al, 2018: Minimal East Antarctic Ice Sheet retreat onto
land during the past eight million years. Nature, 558(7709), 284-287,
doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0155-6.

Shaltout, M., K. Tonbol and A. Omstedt, 2015: Sea level change and projected
future flooding along the Egyptian Mediterranean coast. Oceanologia,
57(4), 293-307.

Shannon, S.R. et al., 2013: Enhanced basal lubrication and the contribution
of the Greenland ice sheet to future sea level rise. PVAS, 110(35), 14156—
14161.

Shatkin, G., 2019: Futures of Crisis, Futures of Urban Political Theory: Flooding
in Asian Coastal Megacities. Int. 4 Urban Reg. Res., 43(2), 207-226.

Shay, L.K. et al., 1992: Upper ocean response to Hurricane Gilbert. { Geophys.
Res-Oceans, 97(C12), 20227-20248, doi:10.1029/92)C01586.

Shayegh, S., J. Moreno-Cruz and K. Caldeira, 2016: Adapting to rates versus
amounts of climate change: a case of adaptation to sea level rise. Environ.
Res, Lett., 11(10), 104007.

Shen, Q. et al, 2018: Recent high-resolution Antarctic ice velocity maps reveal
increased mass loss in Wilkes Land, East Antarctica. Sci Rep., 8(1), 4477,
doi:10.1038/s41598-018-22 765-0.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Shepard, C.C., C.M. Crain and M.W. Beck, 2011: The protective role of coastal
marshes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One, 6(11), 27374.

Shepherd, A. et al., 2012: A Reconciled Estimate of Ice sheet Mass Balance.
Science, 338(6111), 1183-1189, doi:10.1126/science.1228102.

Shepherd, M. and K.C. Binita, 2015: Climate change and African Americans in
the USA. Geogr. Compass, 9(11), 579-591, doi:10.1111/gec3.12244.

Sherwood, E.T. and H.S. Greening, 2014: Potential Impacts and Management
Implications of Climate Change on Tampa Bay Estuary Critical Coastal Habitats.
Environ. Manage. , 53(2), 401-415, doi:10.1007/s00267-013-0179-5.

Shi, L., E. Chu and J. Debats, 2015: Explaining progress in climate adaptation
planning across 156 US municipalities. / Am. Plan. Assoc., 81(3), 191-202.

Shope, J.B., C.D. Storlazzi and R.K. Hoeke, 2017: Projected atoll shoreline
and run-up changes in response to sea level rise and varying large wave
conditions at Wake and Midway Atolls, Northwestern Hawaiian Islands.
Geomorphology, 295, 537-550.

Short, FT. et al, 2014: Monitoring in the Western Pacific region shows
evidence of seagrass decline in line with global trends. Mar. Pollut. Bull,
83(2), 408-416, doi:10.1016/). MARPOLBUL.2014.03.036.

Siders, A., 2019: Social justice implications of US managed retreat buyout
programs. Clim. Change, 152(2), 239-257.

Sieber, I.M., R. Biesbroek and D. de Block, 2018: Mechanism-based
explanations of impasses in the governance of ecosystem-based
adaptation. Reg. Environ. Change, 18(8), 2379-2390.

Siegle, E. and M.B. Costa, 2017: Nearshore Wave Power Increase on Reef-
Shaped Coasts Due to Sea-Level Rise. Farth’s Future, 5(10), 1054-1065.
Siikamaki, J., JN. Sanchirico and S.L. Jardine, 2012: Global economic potential
for reducing carbon dioxide emissions from mangrove loss. PNAS, 109(36),

14369-14374.

Simpson, M. et al, 2016: Decision analysis for management of Nat. Hazards.
Annu. Rev. Environ. Resourc., 41, 489-516.

Slangen, A. et al, 2014a: Projecting twenty-first century regional sea level
changes. Clim. Change, 124(1-2), 317-332, doi:10.1007/s10584-01 4-1080-9.

Slangen, A. et al., 2016: Anthropogenic forcing dominates global mean sea
level rise since 1970. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(7), 701-705.

Slangen, A., J.A. Church, X. Zhang and D. Monselesan, 2014b: Detection and
attribution of global mean thermosteric sea level change. Geophys. Res.
lett, 41(16), 5951-5959.

Slangen, A. and R. Van de Wal, 2011: An assessment of uncertainties in using
volume-area modelling for computing the twenty-first century glacier
contribution to sea level change. The Cryosphere, 5(3), 673.

Slangen, A. et al., 2017a: The impact of uncertainties in ice sheet dynamics on
sea level allowances at tide gauge locations. 4 Mar. Sci Eng., 5(2), 1-20,
doi:10.3390/jmse5020021.

Slangen, A.B. et al, 201 7b: Evaluating model simulations of twentieth-century sea
level rise. Part I: Global mean sea level change. { Clim., 30(21), 8539-8563.
Sleeter, B.M., N.J. Wood, C.E. Soulard and TS. Wilson, 2017: Projecting
community changes in hazard exposure to support long-term risk
reduction: a case study of tsunami hazards in the US Pacific Northwest. /nt.

J Disast. Risk Reduc., 22, 10-22.

Smajgl, A. et al, 2015: Responding to rising sea levels in the Mekong Delta.
Nat. Clim. Change, 5(2), 167-174.

Smith, A., D. Martin and S. Cockings, 2016: Spatio-temporal population
modelling for enhanced assessment of urban exposure to flood risk. Appi.
Spat. Anal. Policy, 9(2), 145-163.

Smith, G.P. and B.C. Glavovic, 2014: Conclusions: integrating Nat. Hazards
risk management and climate change

adaptation through Nat. Hazards planning. In: Adapting to Climate Change.
Springer, pp. 405-450, NY, New York, USA, ISBN 978-94-01 7-8630-0.

Smith Ill, TJ. et al, 2009: Cumulative impacts of hurricanes on Florida
mangrove ecosystems: sediment deposition, storm surges and vegetation.
Wetlands, 29(1), 24-34.

Smith, J.B. et al, 2001: Vulnerability to climate change and reasons for
concern: a synthesis. Clim. Change, 913-967.

Chapter 4

Smith, K., 2011: We are seven billion. Nat. Clim. Change, 1, 331-335.

Smith, K.M., 2006: Integrating habitat and shoreline dynamics into living
shoreline applications. In: Management, Policy, Science, and Engineering of
Nonstructural Erosion Control in the Chesapeake Bay, 9-11, Proceedings
of the 2006 Living Shoreline Summit, Edgewater, MD, USA.

Smith, L.C. et al, 2017: Direct measurements of meltwater runoff on the
Greenland ice sheet surface. PNAS, 114(50), E10622-E10631, doi:10.1073/
pnas.1707743114.

Smith, R.-A., 2018: Risk perception and adaptive responses to climate change
and climatic variability in northeastern St. Vincent. 4 Environ. Stud. Sci,
8(1), 73-85.

Smoak, J.M., JL. Breithaupt, TJ. Smith and C.J. Sanders, 2013: Sediment
accretion and organic carbon burial relative to sea level rise and storm
events in two mangrove forests in Everglades National Park. CATENA,
104, 58-66, doi:10.1016/J. CATENA.2012.10.009.

Solomon, S., G.-K. Plattner, R. Knutti and P. Friedlingstein, 2009: Irreversible
climate change due to carbon dioxide emissions. PNAS, 106(6), 1704-1709.

Song, J. et al, 2017: An examination of land use impacts of flooding induced
by sea level rise. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci, 17(3), 315.

Sovacool, B.K., 2018: Bamboo beating bandits: Conflict, inequality, and
vulnerability in the political ecology of climate change adaptation in
Bangladesh. World Dev., 102, 183-194.

Sovacool, B.K., B.-O. Linnér and M.E. Goodsite, 2015: The political economy of
climate adaptation. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(7), 616.

Sowman, M. and M. Gawith, 1994: Participation of disadvantaged
communities in project planning and decision-making: A case-study of
Hout Bay. Development Southern Africa, 11(4), 557-571.

Sowman, M., D. Scott and C. Sutherland, 2016: Governance and Social Justice
Position Paper: Milnerton Beach. ERMD, City of Cape Town.

Spalding, M. et al., 2017: Mapping the global value and distribution of coral
reef tourism. Mar. Policy, 82, 104-113.

Spalding, M., M. Kainuma and L. Collins, 2010: World Atlas of Mangroves.
Earthscan, London, UK, 336-pp., ISBN: 978-1 -84407-657-4.

Spalding, M. et al, 2014: Coastal ecosystems: a critical element of risk
reduction. Conserv. Lett., 7(3), 293-301.

Speelman, L.H., R.J. Nicholls and J. Dyke, 2017: Contemporary migration
intentions in the Maldives: the role of environmental and other factors.
Sustain. Sci, 12(3), 433-451.

Spence, A., W. Poortinga and N. Pidgeon, 2012: The psychological distance of
climate change. Risk Anal, 32(6), 957-972.

Spencer, T. et al., 2016: Global coastal wetland change under sea level rise
and related stresses: The DIVA Wetland Change Model. Global Planet.
Change, 139, 15-30.

Speybroeck, J. et al., 2006: Beach nourishment: an ecologically sound coastal
defence alternative? A review. Aquat. Conserv: Mar. Freshw. Ecosyst.,
16(4), 419-435.

St. John Ill, B. and J.-E. Yusuf, 2019: Perspectives of the Expert and Experienced
on Challenges to Regional Adaptation for Sea Level Rise: Implications for
Multisectoral Readiness and Boundary Spanning. Coastal Manage, 47(2) 1-18.

Stalenberg, B., 2013: Innovative flood defences in highly urbanised water
cities. In: Climate Adaptation and Flood Risk in Coastal Cities, [Aerts et al.
(eds.)], 145-164. Earthscan, Oxon, UK, ISBN: 978-1-84971-346-7.

Stammer, D., A. Cazenave, R.M. Ponte and M.E. Tamisiea, 2013: Causes for
contemporary regional sea level changes. Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci., 5, 21-46.

Stanley, J.-D. and P. L. Clemente, 2017: Increased land subsidence and sea
level rise are submerging Egypt's Nile Delta coastal margin. GSA Today,
27(5), 4-11.

Stap, L.B. et al, 2016: CO2 over the past 5 million years: Continuous
simulation and new [7/11B-based proxy data. Farth Planet. Sci. Lett., 439,
1-10, doi:10.1016/j.epsl.2016.01.022.

Stap, L.B. et al, 2018: Modeled Influence of Land Ice and CO2 on Polar
Amplification and Palaeoclimate Sensitivity During the Past 5 Million Years.
Paleoceanogr. Paleocl., 33(4), 381-394, doi:10.1002/201 7pa003313.

439

 
 

Chapter 4

Stark, J., T. Van Oyen, P. Meire and S. Temmerman, 2015: Observations of tidal
and storm surge attenuation in a large tidal marsh. Limnol Oceanogr.
60(4), 1371-1381.

State of Louisiana, 2015: National Disaster Resilience Competition, Phase II
Application. State of Louisiana, Louisiana.

Steele, J.E. et al, 2017: Mapping poverty using mobile phone and satellite
data. J R. Soc. Interface, 14(127), 20160690.

Steig, E.J. et al, 2015: Influence of West Antarctic Ice Sheet collapse on
Antarctic surface climate. Geophys. Res. Lett, 42(12), 4862-4868,
doi:10.1002/2015GL063861.

Steiger, E., R. Westerholt, B. Resch and A. Zipf, 2015: Twitter as an indicator for
whereabouts of people? Correlating Twitter with UK census data. Comput.
Environ. Urban, 54, 255-265.

Stephens, S.A., R.G. Bell and J. Lawrence, 2018: Developing signals to trigger
adaptation to sea level rise. Fnviron. Res. Lett., 13(10), 104004.

Stevens, FR., A.E. Gaughan, C. Linard and A.J. Tatem, 2015: Disaggregating
census data for population mapping using random forests with
remotely-sensed and ancillary data. PLoS One, 10(2), e0107042.

Stevens, L.A. etal., 2016: Greenland |ce Sheet flow response to runoff variability.
Geophys. Res. Lett., 43(21), 11295-11303, doi:10.1002/2016GL070414.
Stewart, R., T. Noyce and H. Possingham, 2003: Opportunity cost of ad hoc
marine reserve design decisions: an example from South Australia. Mar.

Ecol. Prog. Ser, 253, 25-38.

Stiles Jr, W.A., 2006: Living Shorelines: A Strategic Approach to Making
it Work on the Ground in Virginia in Management, Policy, Science, and
Engineering of Nonstructural Erosion Control in the Chesapeake Bay. In:
Living Shoreline Summit, [Erdle, S.Y., J.L.D. Davis and K.G. Sellner (eds.)],
CRC Press, Edgewater, MD, USA, pp. 99-105.

Stirling, A. 2010: Keep it complex. Nature,
doi:10.1038/4681029a.

Stive, M.J. et al, 2013: A new alternative to saving our beaches from sea level
rise: The sand engine. J Coast. Res., 29(5), 1001-1008.

Stojanov, R. et al, 2017: Local perceptions of climate change impacts and
migration patterns in Malé, Maldives. Geogr. 4, 183(4), 370-385.

Storey, D. and S. Hunter, 2010: Kiribati: an environmental ‘perfect storm’.
Austral. Geogr., 41(2), 167-181.

Storlazzi, C., E. Elias, M. Field and M. Presto, 2011: Numerical modeling of the
impact of sea level rise on fringing coral reef hydrodynamics and sediment
transport. Coral Reefs, 30(1), 83-96.

Storlazzi, C. et al., 2018: Most atolls will be uninhabitable by the mid-21st
century due to sea level rise exacerbating wave-driven flooding. Sci. Adv.,
4(4), 1-9.

Storlazzi, C. et al., 2017: Rigorously valuing the role of coral reefs in coastal
protection: An example from Maui, Hawaii, USA. In: Coastal Dynamics
2017, Helsinger, Denmark, [Aagaard, T., R. Deigaard and D. Fuhrman
(eds.)], pp. 665-674.

Storto, A. et al., 2017: Steric sea level variability (1993-2010) in an ensemble
of ocean reanalyses and objective analyses. Clim. Dyn., 49(3), 709-729.
Strauss, B.H., R.E. Kopp, W.V. Sweet and K. Bittermann, 2016: Unnatural coastal
floods: Sea level rise and the human fingerprint on US floods since 1950.
Climate Central, Princeton, NJ, USA, 1-16, Available at: http://sealevel.

climatecentral.org/uploads/research/Unnatural-Coastal-Floods-2016.pdf

Suckall, N. et al., 2018: A framework for identifying and selecting long term
adaptation policy directions for deltas. Sci. Total Environ., 633, 946-957.

Sultana, P. and RM. Thompson, 2017: Adaptation or conflict? Responses to
climate change in water management in Bangladesh. Environ. Sci. Policy,
78, 149-156.

Suppasri, A. et al., 2015: A decade after the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami: The
progress in disaster preparedness and future challenges in Indonesia, Sri
Lanka, Thailand and the Maldives. Pure Appi. Geophys., 172(12), 3313-3341.

Suroso, D. S. A. and T. Firman, 2018: The role of spatial planning in reducing
exposure towards impacts of global sea level rise case study: Northern
coast of Java, Indonesia. Ocean Coast. Manage, 153, 84-97.

468, 1029-1031,

440

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Susskind, L., D. Rumore, C. Hulet and P. Field, 2015: Managing climate
risks in coastal communities: Strategies for engagement, readiness and
adaptation. Anthem Environment and Sustainability, Anthem Press.

Susskind, L.E., S. McKearnen and J. Thomas-Lamar, (eds.), 1999: The consensus
building handbook: A comprehensive guide to reaching agreement. SAGE
Publications.

Sutter, J. et al, 2016: Ocean temperature thresholds for Last Interglacial
West Antarctic Ice Sheet collapse. Geophys. Res. Lett., 43(6), 2675-2682,
doi:10.1002/2016GL067818.

Sutton-Grier, A.E. et al, 2018: Investing in Natural and Nature-Based
Infrastructure: Building Better Along Our Coasts. Sustainability, 10(2), 523.

Sutton-Grier, A.E., K. Wowk and H. Bamford, 2015: Future of our coasts: the
potential for natural and hybrid infrastructure to enhance the resilience of
our coastal communities, economies and ecosystems. Environ. Sci. Policy,
51, 137-148.

Suzuki, T. and M. Ishii, 2011: Regional distribution of sea level changes resulting
from enhanced greenhouse warming in the Model for Interdisciplinary
Research on Climate version 3.2. Geophys. Res. Lett., 38(2).

Sweet, W.V. and J. Park, 2014: From the extreme to the mean: Acceleration
and tipping points of coastal inundation from sea level rise. Earth’s Future,
2(12}, 579-600.

Syvitski, J.P. et al., 2009: Sinking deltas due to human activities. Nat. Geosci.,
2(10}, 681-686.

Syvitski, J.P. and Y. Saito, 2007: Morphodynamics of deltas under the influence
of humans. Global Planet. Change, 57(3-4), 261-282.

Szabo, S. et al., 2016: Soil salinity, household wealth and food insecurity in
tropical deltas: evidence from south-west coast of Bangladesh. Sustain.
Sci, 11(3), 411-421.

Tamisiea, M.E., 2011: Ongoing glacial isostatic contributions to observations
of sea level change. Geophys. J Int, 186(3), 1036-1044.

Tamura, M., N. Kumano, M. Yotsukuri and H. Yokoki, 2019: Global assessment
of the effectiveness of adaptation in coastal areas based on RCP/SSP
scenarios. Clim. Change, 152(3—4), 1-15.

Tarbotton, C., F. Dall’Osso, D. Dominey-Howes and J. Goff, 2015: The use
of empirical vulnerability functions to assess the response of buildings
to tsunami impact: comparative review and summary of best practice.
Earth-Sci Rev., 142, 120-134.

Taylor, K.E., R.J. Stouffer and G.A. Meehl, 2012: An overview of CMIP5 and the
experiment design. Bull Am. Meteorol. Soc., 93(4), 485-498.

Taylor, M.D., T.F Gaston and V. Raoult, 2018: The economic value of fisheries
harvest supported by saltmarsh and mangrove productivity in two
Australian estuaries. Ecol. indic., 84, 701-709.

Taylor, R.G. et al., 2013: Ground water and climate change. Nat. Clim. Change,
3(4), 322-329.

Tebaldi, C., B.H. Strauss and C.E. Zervas, 2012: Modelling sea level rise
impacts on storm surges along US coasts. Environ. Res. Lett., 7(1), 014032.

Tedesco, M. et al, 2016: The darkening of the Greenland ice sheet: trends,
drivers, and projections (1981-2100). The Cryosphere, 10(2), 477-496,
doi:10.51 94/tc-10-477-2016.

Telesca, L. et al, 2015: Seagrass meadows (Posidonia oceanica) distribution
and trajectories of change. Sci Rep., 5, 12505-12505, doi:10.1038/
srep12505.

Tellman, B., LE. Saiers and OAR. Cruz, 2016: Quantifying the impacts of
land use change on flooding in data-poor watersheds in El Salvador with
community-based model calibration. Reg. Environ. Change, 16(4), 1183-1196.

Temmerman, S. et al., 2013: Ecosystem-based coastal defence in the face of
global change. Nature, 504(7478), 79.

Termeer, C. et al, 2016: Coping with the wicked problem of climate adaptation
across scales: The Five R Governance Capabilities. Landscape Urban Plan.,
154, 11-19.

Termeer, C.J., A. Dewulf and G.R. Biesbroek, 2017: Transformational change:
governance interventions for climate change adaptation from a continuous
change perspective. /. Environ. Plan. Manage., 60(4), 558-576.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Termeer, C.J, A. Dewulf G. Breeman and S. J. Stiller, 2015: Governance
capabilities for dealing wisely with wicked problems. Adm. Soc. 47(6),
680-710.

Terpstra, T., 2011: Emotions, trust, and perceived risk: Affective and cognitive
routes to flood preparedness behavior. Risk Anal., 31(10), 1658-1675.

Tessler, Z. et al., 2015: Profiling risk and sustainability in coastal deltas of the
world. Science, 349(6248), 638-643.

Tessler, Z.D., C.J. VGrésmarty, |. Overeem and J.P. Syvitski, 2018: A model of
water and sediment balance as determinants of relative sea level rise in
contemporary and future deltas. Geomorphology, 305, 209-220.

Texier-Teixeira, P. and E. Edelblutte, 2017: Jakarta: Mumbai — Two Megacities
Facing Floods Engaged in a Marginalization Process of Slum Areas. In:
Identifying Emerging Issues in Disaster Risk Reduction, Migration, Climate
Change and Sustainable Development. Springer, pp. 81-99.

Thaler, T. et al., 2019: Drivers and barriers of adaptation initiatives-How
societal transformation affects natural hazard management and risk
mitigation in Europe. Sci Total Environ., 650, 1073-1082.

The Imbie team, 2018: Mass balance of the Antarctic Ice Sheet from 1992 to
2017. Nature, 558(7709), 219-222, doi:10.1038/s41586-018-0179-y.

The Royal Society Science Policy Centre, 2014: Resilience to Extreme Weather.
The Royal Society, London, 124-pp. [Available at: https://royalsociety. org/-/
media/policy/projects/resilience-climate-change/resilience-full-report. pdf].
Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Thi Ha, D., S. Ouillon and G. Van Vinh, 2018: Water and Suspended Sediment
Budgets in the Lower Mekong from High-Frequency Measurements (2009-
2016}. Water, 10(7), 846.

Thiault, L. et al, 2018: Space and time matter in social-ecological vulnerability
assessments. Mar. Policy, 88, 213-221.

Thomas, A. and L. Benjamin, 2018: Perceptions of climate change risk in The
Bahamas. / Environ. Stud. Sci, 8(1}, 63-72.

Thompson, E.L. et al, 2015: Differential proteomic responses of selectively
bred and wild-type Sydney rock oyster populations exposed to elevated
CO2. Mol Ecol, 24(6), 1248-1262.

Thompson, P. and G. Mitchum, 2014: Coherent sea level variability on the North
Atlantic western boundary. 4 Geophys. Res-Oceans, 119(9), 5676-5689.
Thompson, P. et al., 2016: Forcing of recent decadal variability in the Equatorial

and North Indian Ocean. £ Geophys. Res-Oceans, 121(9), 6762-6778.

Thomson, J. and W.E. Rogers, 2014: Swell and sea in the emerging Arctic
Ocean. Geophys. Res. Lett., 41(9), 3136-3140.

Thorhaug, A. et al, 2017: Seagrass blue carbon dynamics in the Gulf of
Mexico: Stocks, losses from anthropogenic disturbance, and gains through
seagrass restoration. Sci, Total Environ., 605-606, 626-636, doi:10.1016/J.
SCITOTENV.2017.06.189.

Thorner, J., L. Kumar and S.D.A. Smith, 2014: Impacts of climate-change-
driven sea level rise on intertidal rocky reef habitats will be variable and
site specific. PLoS One, 9(1}, 1-7, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0086130.

Timsina, J. et al, 2018: Can Bangladesh produce enough cereals to meet
future demand? Agric. Syst., 163, 36-44.

Tonmoy, F. N. and A. El-Zein, 2018: Vulnerability to sea level rise: A novel
local-scale indicator-based assessment methodology and application to
eight beaches in Shoalhaven, Australia. Ecol. Indic., 85, 295-307.

Torio, D. D. and G. L. Chmura, 2015: Impacts of sea level rise on marsh as fish
habitat. Estuaries Coasts, 38(4), 1288-1303.

Torres, A., J. Brandt, K. Lear and J. Liu, 2017: A looming tragedy of the sand
commons. Science, 357(6355), 970-971.

Torres-Freyermuth, A. et al., 2018: On the assesment of detached breakwaters
on a sea-breeze dominated beach. Coast. Eng. Proc., 1(36), 36.

Tran Anh, D., L. Hoang, M. Bui and P. Rutschmann, 2018: Simulating future
flows and salinity intrusion using combined one-and two-dimensional
hydrodynamic modelling — the case of Hau River, Vietnamese Mekong
delta. Water, 10(7), 897.

Trang, N.T.T., 2016: Architectural Approaches to a Sustainable Community
with Floating Housing Units Adapting to Climate Change and Sea Level

Chapter 4

Rise in Vietnam. World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology,
International Journal of Civil Environmental, Structural. Construction and
Architectural Engineering, 10(2), 168-179.

Trenberth, K.E. et al., 2018: Hurricane Harvey links to Ocean Heat Content and
Climate Change Adaptation. Earth's Future, 6(5), 730-744.

Trenberth, K.E. and J. Fasullo, 2007: Water and energy budgets of hurricanes
and implications for climate change. £ Geophys. Res-Atmos., 112(D23),
1-10, doi:10.1029/2006)D008304.

Trenberth, K. E. and J. Fasullo, 2008: Energy budgets of Atlantic hurricanes and
changes from 1970. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 9(9), 1-12,
doi:10.1029/2007GC001847.

Triyanti, A. M. Bavinck, J. Gupta and M.A. Marfai, 2017: Social capital,
interactive governance and coastal protection: The effectiveness of
mangrove ecosystem-based strategies in promoting inclusive development
in Demak, Indonesia. Ocean Coast. Manage, 150, 3-11.

Trusel, L.D. et al, 2018: Nonlinear rise in Greenland runoff in response to
post-industrial Arctic warming. Nature, 564(7734), 104-108, doi:10.1038/
s41586-018-0752-4.

Trusel, L.D. et al, 2015: Divergent trajectories of Antarctic surface melt
under two twenty-first-century climate scenarios. Nat. Geosci,, 8, 927,
doi:10.1038/ngeo2563.

Tsai, V.C., A.L. Stewart and A.F. Thompson, 2015: Marine ice sheet profiles and
stability under Coulomb basal conditions. 4 Glaciol, 61(226), 205-215.
Tuleya, R.E. et al. 2016: Impact of Upper-Tropospheric Temperature Anomalies
and Vertical Wind Shear on Tropical Cyclone Evolution Using an Idealized
Version of the Operational GFDL Hurricane Model. £ Atmos. Sci, 73(10),

3803-3820, doi:10.1175/JAS-D-16-0045.1.

Tuts, R. et al, 2015: Guiding principles for city dimate action planning [Osanjo,
T. (ed.)]. UN-Habitat, Nairobi, Kenya [Available at: http://e-lib.icleiorg/
wp-content/uploads/201 6/02/Guiding-Principles-for-City-Climate-Action-
Planning.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Tuya, F et al., 2014: Ecological structure and function differs between habitats
dominated by seagrasses and green seaweeds. Mar. Environ. Res., 98,
1-13, doi:10.1016/j.marenvres.2014.03.015.

Uddameri, V., S. Singaraju and E.A. Hernandez, 2014: Impacts of sea level
rise and urbanization on groundwater availability and sustainability of
coastal communities in semi-arid South Texas. Environ. Earth Sci, 71(6),
2503-2515.

Uddin, M.N. et al, 2019: Mapping of climate vulnerability of the coastal
region of Bangladesh using principal component analysis. App! Geogr,
102, 47-57.

Uddin, MS., E.d.R. van Steveninck, M. Stuip and M.A.R. Shah, 2013: Economic
valuation of provisioning and cultural services of a protected mangrove
ecosystem: a case study on Sundarbans Reserve Forest, Bangladesh.
Ecosyst. Serv., 5, 88-93.

Uebbing, B., J. Kusche, R. Rietbroek and FW. Landerer, 2019: Processing
choices affect ocean mass estimates from GRACE. 4 Geophys. Res-Oceans,
124(2}, 1029-1044.

Uittenbroek, C.J., H.L. Mees, D.L. Hegger and P.P. Driessen, 2019: The design of
public participation: who participates, when and how? Insights in climate
adaptation planning from the Netherlands. / Environ. Plan. Manage., 1-19.

UNDP, 2017: Enhancing Climate Change Adaptation in the North Coast and
Nile Delta Regions in Egypt (Funding proposal FP053). United Nations
Development Programme, Egypt. [Available at: www.greenclimate.fund/
documents/20182/574760/Funding_proposal_-_FP053_-_UNDP_-_Egypt.
pdf/6f006804—3009-43 dc-9c49-4ad01c5d7e05]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

UNEP, 2015: Regional State of the Coast Report: Western Indian Ocean.
United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi, Kenya, 546.

Unsworth, R.K. et al, 2015: A framework for the resilience of seagrass
ecosystems. Mar Pollut. Bull, 100(1), 34-46, doi:10.1016/J.
MARPOLBUL.2015.08.016.

USACE, 2002: Coastal Engineering Manual. Department of the Army, U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers, Engineers, Vicksburg, Mississippi, USA [Available at:

441

 
 

Chapter 4

www. plainwater.com/pubs/em/em-1110-—2-1100-coastal-engineering-
manual/]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

USACE, 2011: Sea level Change Considerations for Civil Works
Programs. Department of the Army, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Engineers, Washington, DC [Available at: https://web.archive.org/
web/2016051 9022621 /www.corpsclimate. us/docs/EC_1165-2-212%20
-Final_10_Nov_2011.pdf].

Vachaud, G. et al., 2018: Flood-related risks in Ho Chi Minh City and ways of
mitigation. £ Hydrol, 573, 1021-1027.

Van de Wal, R. and M. Wild, 2001: Modelling the response of glaciers to
climate change by applying volume-area scaling in combination with a
high resolution GCM. Clim. Dyn., 18(3—4), 359-366.

van de Wal, R.W. et al, 2015: Self-regulation of ice flow varies across the
ablation area in south-west Greenland. The Cryosphere, 9(2), 603-611,
doi:10.5194/tc-9-603-2015.

van den Broeke, M.R. et al., 2016: On the recent contribution of the Greenland
ice sheet to sea level change. The Cryosphere, 10, 1933-1946, doi:10.5194/
tc-10-1933-2016.

van der Linden, S., 2015: The social-psychological determinants of climate
change risk perceptions: Towards a comprehensive model. £ Environ.
Psychol, 41, 112-124.

Van der Pol, T. and J. Hinkel, 2018: Uncertainty Representations of Mean Sea
level Change: A Telephone Game? Clim. Change, 152(3-4), 393-411.

Van Hooidonk, R. et al., 2016: Local-scale projections of coral reef futures and
implications of the Paris Agreement. Sci. Rep., 6, 39666.

van Loon-Steensma, J. and P. Vellinga, 2014: Robust, multifunctional flood
defenses in the Dutch rural riverine area. Nat. Hazards Earth. Syst. Sci,
14(5}, 1085-1098.

Van Putten, I.E. et al, 2016: Objectives for management of socio-ecological
systems in the Great Barrier Reef region, Australia. Reg. Environ. Change,
16(5}, 1417-1431.

Van Ruijven, B.J. et al., 2014: Enhancing the relevance of Shared Socioeconomic
Pathways for climate change impacts, adaptation and vulnerability
research. Clim. Change, 122(3), 481-494.

Van Slobbe, E. et al, 2013: Building with Nature: in search of resilient storm
surge protection strategies. Nat. Hazards, 66(3), 1461-1480.

Van Wesenbeeck, B. et al, 2017: implementing nature based flood
protection: principles and implementation guidance. World Bank Group,
Washington, D.C. [Available at: —http://documents.worldbank.org/
curated/en/73942 1509427698706/pdf/1 20735-REVISED-PUBLIC-Broch
ure-Implementing-nature-based-flood-protection-web.pdf].  Acccessed:
2019/09/201.

Van Wessem, J. et al, 2014: Improved representation of East Antarctic surface
mass balance in a regional atmospheric climate model. / Glaciol , 60(222),
761-770.

van Woesik, R., Y. Golbuu and G. Roff, 2015: Keep up or drown: adjustment
of western Pacific coral reefs to sea level rise in the 21st century. R. Soc.
Open Sci, 2(7), 150181.

Vanderlinden, J.-P. et al., 2018: Scoping the risks associated with accelerated
coastal permafrost thaw: lessons from Bykovsky (Sakha Republic, Russian
Federation) and Tuktoyaktuk (Northwest Territories, Canada). In: Furopean
Geosciences Union General Assembly, Vienna, Austria, Geophysical
Research Abstracts 20.

Vedeld, T., A. Coly, N.M. Ndour and S. Hellevik, 2016: Climate adaptation at
what scale? Multi-level governance, resilience, and coproduction in Saint
Louis, Senegal. Nat. Hazards, 82(2), 173-199.

Veettil, B.K. et al, 2018: Mangroves of Vietnam: Historical development,
current state of research and future threats. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci., 218,
212-236.

Velicogna, I., T. Sutterley and M. Van Den Broeke, 2014: Regional acceleration
in ice mass loss from Greenland and Antarctica using GRACE time-variable
gravity data. Geophys. Res. Lett., 41(22), 8130-8137.

442

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Vella, K. et al, 2016: Voluntary collaboration for adaptive governance: the
southeast Florida regional climate change compact. J Plan. Educ. Res.,
36(3), 363-376.

Vermeer, M. and S. Rahmstorf, 2009: Global sea level linked to global
temperature. PNAS, 106(51), 21527-21532.

Vidas, D., 2014: Sea level rise and international law: At the convergence of
two epochs. Clim. Law, 4(1-2}, 70-84.

Viguié, V., S. Hallegatte and J. Rozenberg, 2014: Downscaling long term
socioeconomic scenarios at city scale: A case study on Paris. Technol.
Forecast. Soc. Change, 87, 305-324.

Vij, S. et al, 2017: Climate adaptation approaches and key policy
characteristics: Cases from South Asia. Environ. Sci. Policy, 78, 58-65.

Villamizar, A. et al., 2017: Climate adaptation in South America with emphasis
in coastal areas: the state-of-the-art and case studies from Venezuela and
Uruguay. Clim. Dev., 9(4), 364-382.

Villarini, G. and G.A. Vecchi, 2011: North Atlantic Power Dissipation Index
(PDI) and Accumulated Cyclone Energy (ACE): Statistical Modeling and
Sensitivity to Sea Surface Temperature Changes. 4 Clim., 25(2), 625-637,
doi:10.1175/JCLI-D-11-00146.1.

Villnas, A. et al, 2013: The role of recurrent disturbances for ecosystem
multifunctionality. Ecology, 94(10), 2275-2287.

Vinet, F., D. Lumbroso, S. Defossez and L. Boissier, 2012: A comparative
analysis of the loss of life during two recent floods in France: the sea surge
caused by the storm Xynthia and the flash flood in Var. Nat. Hazards, 61(3),
1179-1201.

Vinh, V.D., S. Ouillon, TD. Thanh and L. Chu, 2014: Impact of the Hoa Binh dam
(Vietnam) on water and sediment budgets in the Red River basin and delta.
Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 18(10), 3987-4005.

Vitousek, S. et al, 2017: Doubling of coastal flooding frequency within
decades due to sea level rise. Sci. Rep., 7(1), 1399.

Vizcaino, M. et al, 2015: Coupled simulations of Greenland Ice Sheet and
climate change up to AD 2300. Geophys. Res. Lett., 42(10), 3927-3935.
von Schuckmann, K. et al., 2016: An imperative to monitor Earth’s energy
imbalance. Nat. Clim. Change, 6, 138-144, doi:10.1038/nclimate2876.
Vorésmarty, C.J. et al., 2003: Anthropogenic sediment retention: major global
impact from registered river impoundments. Global Planet. Change, 39(1-

2), 169-190.

Vousdoukas, M.I., 2016: Developments in large-scale coastal flood hazard
mapping. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 16(8), 1841.

Vousdoukas, M.I. et al, 2018a: Understanding epistemic uncertainty in
large-scale coastal flood risk assessment for present and future climates.
Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci, 18(8), 2127-2142.

Vousdoukas, M.I. et al., 2018b: Climatic and socioeconomic controls of future
coastal flood risk in Europe. Nat. Clim. Change, 8(9), 776.

Vousdoukas, M.I. et al, 2017: Extreme sea levels on the rise along Europe's
coasts. Earth's Future, 5(3), 304-323.

Vousdoukas, M.I. et al, 2018c: Global probabilistic projections of extreme
sea levels show intensification of coastal flood hazard. Nat. Commun.,
9(1), 2360.

Vousdoukas, M.I. et al., 2016: Projections of extreme storm surge levels along
Europe. Clim. Dyn., 47(9-10), 3171-3190.

Vu, D., T. Yamada and H. Ishidaira, 2018: Assessing the impact of sea level rise
due to climate change on seawater intrusion in Mekong Delta, Vietnam.
Water Sci. Technol, 77(6), 1632-1639.

Vuik, V., B.W. Borsje, PW. Willemsen and S.N. Jonkman, 2019: Salt marshes
for flood risk reduction: Quantifying long-term effectiveness and life-cycle
costs. Ocean Coast. Manage, 171, 96-110.

VWuik, V. et al, 2015: Nature-based flood protection: the efficiency of vegetated
foreshores in reducing wave run-up. In: Proceedings of the 36th IAHR
World Congr, 36, 1-7.

Wada, Y. et al, 2012: Past and future contribution of global groundwater
depletion to sea-level rise. Geophys. Res. Lett., 39(9), 1-6.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Wada, Y. et al, 2016: Fate of water pumped from underground and
contributions to sea level rise. Nat Clim. Change, 6(8), 777-780,
doi:10.1038/nclimate3001.

Wada, Y. et al., 2017: Recent Changes in Land Water Storage and its
Contribution to Sea Level Variations. Surv. Geophys., 38(1), 131-152.

Wadey, M., S. Brown, RJ. Nicholls and |. Haigh, 2017: Coastal flooding in
the Maldives: an assessment of historic events and their implications. Nat.
Hazards, 89(1), 131-159.

Wahl, T., FM. Calafat and M.E. Luther, 2014: Rapid changes in the seasonal
sea level cycle along the US Gulf coast from the late 20th century. Geophys.
Res, Lett., 41(2), 491-498.

Wahl, T. et al., 2017: Understanding extreme sea levels for broad-scale coastal
impact and adaptation analysis. Nat. Commun., 8, 1-12, doi:10.1038/
ncomms16075.

Wahl, T. and N. G. Plant, 2015: Changes in erosion and flooding risk due to
long-term and cyclic oceanographic trends. Geophys. Res. Lett, 42(8),
2943-2950.

Waibel, M.S., C.L. Hulbe, C.S. Jackson and D.F. Martin, 2018: Rate of mass
loss across the instability threshold for Thwaites Glacier determines
rate of mass loss for entire basin. Geophys. Res. Lett., 45(2), 809-816,
doi:10.1002/2017GL076470.

Walker, W.E., V.A.W.J. Marchau and J.H. Kwakkel, 2013: Uncertainty in the
Framework of Policy Analysis. In: Public Policy Analysis: New Developments
[Thissen, W.A.H. and W.E. Walker (eds.)]. Springer US, Boston, pp. 215-261.

Walker, W.E., S.A. Rahman and J. Cave, 2001: Adaptive policies, policy
analysis, and policy-making. Furopean J. Oper. Res. Soc., 128(2), 282-289,
doi:10.1016/0377-221 7(00)00071-0.

Wamsley, T.V. et al., 2010: The potential of wetlands in reducing storm surge.
Ocean Engineering, 37(1), 59-68.

Wang, W., H. Liu, Y. Liand J. Su, 2014: Development and management of land
reclamation in China. Ocean Coast. Manage, 102, 415-425.

Warner, J.E, M.F. van Staveren and J. van Tatenhove, 2018a: Cutting dikes,
cutting ties? Reintroducing flood dynamics in coastal polders in Bangladesh
and the netherlands. /nt. / Disast. Risk Reduc., 32, 106-112.

Warner, J.F., A.J. Wesselink and G.D. Geldof, 2018b: The politics of adaptive
climate management: Scientific recipes and lived reality. WiRes. Clim.
Change, 9(3), e515.

Warner, K. and T. Afifi, 2014: Where the rain falls: Evidence from 8 countries
on how vulnerable households use migration to manage the risk of rainfall
variability and food insecurity. Clim. Dev., 6(1), 1-17.

Warner, K. et al., 2013: Changing climate, moving people: framing migration,
displacement and planned relocation. UNU-EHS, Bonn. (Available at:
https://iunu.edu/media/migration.unu.edu/publication/229/Policybrief_8_
web.pdf). Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Warrick, O. et al, 2017: The ‘Pacific adaptive capacity analysis framework’:
guiding the assessment of adaptive capacity in Pacific Island communities.
Reg. Environ. Change, 17(4), 1039-1051.

Wasson, K., A. Woolfolk and C. Fresquez, 2013: Ecotones as Indicators of
Changing Environmental Conditions: Rapid Migration of Salt Marsh-
Upland Boundaries. Fstuaries Coasts, 36(3}, 654-664, doi:10.1007/
$12237-013-9601-8.

Watkiss, P., A. Hunt, W. Blyth and J. Dyszynski, 2015: The use of new economic
decision support tools for adaptation assessment: A review of methods
and applications, towards guidance on applicability. Clim. Change, 132,
401-416, doi:10.1007/s10584-014-1250-9.

Watson, C.S. et al, 2015: Unabated global mean sea level rise over the
satellite altimeter era. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(6), 565-568, doi:10.1038/
nclimate2635.

Watson, E. et al., 2017: Anthropocene Survival of Southern New England's
Salt Marshes. Estuaries Coasts, 40(3), 617-625.

Watson, P.J., 2016: A new perspective on global mean sea level (GMSL)
acceleration. Geophys. Res. Lett., 43(12), 6478-6484.

Chapter 4

Waycott, M. et al, 2009: Accelerating loss of seagrasses across the globe
threatens coastal ecosystems. PNAS, 106(30), 12377-12381.

WCRP Global Sea Level Budget Group, 2018: Global sea level budget
1993-present. Farth Syst. Sci Data, 10(3), 1551-1590.

Weatherdon, L.V. et al, 2016: Observed and projected impacts of climate
change on marine fisheries, aquaculture, coastal tourism, and human
health: an update. Front. Mar. Sci, 3, 48.

Weber, E.U., 2016: What shapes perceptions of climate change? New research
since 2010. WiRes. Clim. Change, 7(1), 125-134.

Webler, T. et al, 2016: Design and evaluation of a local analytic-deliberative
process for climate adaptation planning. Local Environ., 21(2), 166-188.

Weertman, J., 1974: Stability of the junction of an ice sheet and an ice shelf.
JL Glaciol, 13(67), 3-11.

Wei, Y.D. and C.K. Leung, 2005: Development zones, foreign investment, and
global city formation in Shanghai. Growth Change, 36(1), 16-40.

Weir, T., L. Dovey and D. Orcherton, 2017: Social and cultural issues raised
by climate change in Pacific Island countries: an overview. Reg. Environ.
Change, 17(4), 1017-1028.

Weisse, R., H. von Storch, H.D. Niemeyer and H. Knaack, 2012: Changing
North Sea storm surge climate: An increasing hazard? Ocean Coast.
Manage, 68, 58-68.

Welch, A., R. Nicholls and A. Lazar, 2017: Evolving deltas: Coevolution with
engineered interventions. Elem Sci Anth, 5(49), 1-18.

Wellstead, A. et al., 2018: Overcoming the ‘Barriers’ Orthodoxy: A New
Approach to Understanding Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation
Governance Challenges in the Canadian Forest Sector. Canadian Journal of
Forest Research 48(10), 1241-1245.

Wellstead, A., J. Rayner and M. Howlett, 2014: Beyond the black box: forest
sector vulnerability assessments and adaptation to climate change in
North America. Environ. Sci. Policy, 35, 109-116.

Werner, A.D. et al, 2017: Hydrogeology and management of freshwater
lenses on atoll islands: Review of current knowledge and research needs.
J Hydrol, 551, 819-844.

Werners, S. et al., 2015: Turning points in climate change adaptation. Ecol.
Soc., 20(4).

Werz, M. and M. Hoffman, 2015: Climate change, migration, and the demand
for greater resources: challenges and responses. SA/S Rev. Int. Aff, 35(1),
99-108.

Wessel, P. and W.H. Smith, 1996: A global, self-consistent, hierarchical, high-
resolution shoreline database. , Geophys. Res-Earth, 101(B4), 8741-8743.

Whitehouse, P.L., N. Gomez, M.A. King and D.A. Wiens, 2019: Solid Earth change
and the evolution of the Antarctic Ice Sheet. Nat. Commun., 10(1), 503.

Wijffels, S. et al., 2016: Ocean temperatures chronicle the ongoing warming
of Earth. Nat. Clim. Change, 6(2), 116-118.

Wilbers, G.-J., M. Becker, Z. Sebesvari and F. G. Renaud, 2014: Spatial and
temporal variability of surface water pollution in the Mekong Delta,
Vietnam. Sci. Total Environ., 485, 653-665.

Wilmsen, B. and M. Webber, 2015: What can we learn from the practice
of development-forced displacement and resettlement for organised
resettlements in response to climate change? Geoforum, 58, 76-85.

Wilson, A.M.W. and C. Forsyth, 2018: Restoring near-shore marine ecosystems
to enhance climate security for island ocean states: Aligning international
processes and local practices. Mar. Policy., 93, 284-294.

Winkelmann, R., A. Levermann, A. Ridgwell and K. Caldeira, 2015: Combustion
of available fossil fuel resources sufficient to eliminate the Antarctic Ice
Sheet. Sci Adv., 1(8), €1500589.

Winkelmann, R. et al., 2011: The Potsdam parallel ice sheet model (PISM-PIK}-
Part 1: Model description. The Cryosphere, 5(3), 715.

Wise, M.G., JA. Dowdeswell, M. Jakobsson and R.D. Larter, 2017: Evidence
of marine ice-cliff instability in Pine Island Bay from iceberg-keel plough
marks. Nature, 550(7677), 506-510, doi:10.1038/nature24458.

Wise, R. et al., 2014: Reconceptualising adaptation to climate change as part
of pathways of change and response. Global Environ. Chang., 28, 325-336.

443

 
 

Chapter 4

Wolff, C. et al., 2016: Effects of scale and input data on assessing the future
impacts of coastal flooding: an application of DIVA for the Emilia-Romagna
coast. Front. Mar. Sci, 3, 41.

Wolfram, M., J. van der Heijden, S. Juhola and J. Patterson, 2019: Learning in
urban climate governance: concepts, key issues and challenges. { Environ.
Pol Plan., 21(1), 1-15.

Wong, PP, 2018: Coastal Protection Measures—Case of Small Island
Developing States to Address Sea level Rise. Asian Journal of Environment
& Ecology, 6(3), 1-14.

Wong, PP. et al., 2014: Coastal systems and low-lying areas. In: Climate
Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global
and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group Il to the Fifth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel of Climate Change
[Barros, V.R., C.B. Field, D.J. Dokken, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, T.E. Bilir,
M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.0. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. Kissel,
A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, L.L. White, R.J. Nicholls and
F. Santos (eds.}]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA. 361-409.

Wong, T.E., A.M. Bakker and K. Keller, 2017: Impacts of Antarctic fast dynamics
on sea level projections and coastal flood defense. Clim. Change, 144(2),
347-364.

Wong, V.N. et al, 2015: Seawater inundation of coastal floodplain sediments:
short-term changes in surface water and sediment geochemistry. Chem.
Geol. 398, 32-45.

Woodroffe, C.D. et al, 2016: Mangrove sedimentation and response to
relative sea level rise. Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci., 8, 243-266.

Woodruff, J.D., J.L. Irish and S.J. Camargo, 2013: Coastal flooding by tropical
cyclones and sea level rise. Nature, 504(7478), 44-52.

Woodruff, S.C. and M. Stults, 2016: Numerous strategies but limited
implementation guidance in US local adaptation plans. Nat. Clim. Change,
6(8), 796.

Woodward, M. et al., 2011: R eal O ptions in flood risk management decision
making. J. Flood Risk Manage., 4(4), 339-349.

Woodward, M., Z. Kapelan and B. Gouldby, 2014: Adaptive Flood Risk
Management Under Climate Change Uncertainty Using Real Options and
Optimization: Adaptive Flood Risk Management. Risk Anal, 34, 75-92,
doi:10.111 1/risa.12088.

Woodworth, P. et al, 2016: Towards a global higher-frequency sea level
dataset. Geasci. Data 1, 3(2), 50-59.

Wé6ppelmann, G. and M. Marcos, 2016: Vertical land motion as a key to
understanding sea level change and variability. Rev. Geophys., 54(1),
64-92.

World Bank, 2017: Population of Egypt. The World Bank.

Wouters, B., A.S. Gardner and G. Moholdt, 2019: Global glacier mass loss
during the GRACE satellite mission (2002-2016). Front. Earth Sci., 7, 96.
Wouters, B. et al., 2015: Dynamic thinning of glaciers on the Southern

Antarctic Peninsula. Science, 348(6237), 899-903.

Wrathall, D.J. and N. Suckall, 2016: Labour migration amidst ecological
change. Migration and Development, 5(2), 314-329.

Wright, L.D. and C.R. Nichols, (eds.), 2018: Tomorrow's Coasts: Complex and
Impermanent. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany.

Wu, J.S. and J.J. Lee, 2015: Climate change games as tools for education and
engagement. Nat. Clim. Change, 5(5), 413.

Wu, W., P. Biber and M. Bethel, 2017: Thresholds of sea level rise rate and
sea level rise acceleration rate in a vulnerable coastal wetland. Ecol Evol,
7(24), 10890-10903, doi:10.1002/ece3.3550.

Xian, S., J. Yin, N. Lin and M. Oppenheimer, 2018: Influence of risk factors and
past events on flood resilience in coastal megacities: comparative analysis
of NYC and Shanghai. Sci. Total Environ., 610, 1251-1261.

Xie, W. et al., 2017: Effects of straw application on coastal saline topsoil
salinity and wheat yield trend. Soi Tillage Res., 169, 1-6.

444

Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities

Yaakub, S.M. et al., 2014: Courage under fire: Seagrass persistence adjacent
to a highly urbanised city-state. Mar Pollut. Bull, 83(2), 417-424,
doi:10.1016/J. MARPOLBUL.2014.01.012.

Yamada, Y. et al, 2017: Response of Tropical Cyclone Activity and Structure
to Global Warming in a High-Resolution Global Nonhydrostatic Model.
£ Clim., 30(23), 9703-9724, doi:10.1175/jcli-d-17-0068.1.

Yamamoto, L. and M. Esteban, 2014: Atoll Island States and International Law
Climate Change Displacement and Sovereignty. Springer, Berlin.

Yamane, M. et al, 2015: Exposure age and ice sheet model constraints on
Pliocene East Antarctic ice sheet dynamics. Nat. Commun., 6, doi:10.1038/
ncomms8016.

Yamano, H. et al., 2007: Atoll island vulnerability to flooding and inundation
revealed by historical reconstruction: Fongafale Islet, Funafuti Atoll, Tuvalu.
Global Planet. Change, 57(3-4), 407-416.

Yan, B. et al, 2016: Socioeconomic vulnerability of the megacity of Shanghai
(China) to sea level rise and associated storm surges. Reg. Environ. Change,
16(5), 1443-1456.

Yang, H. et al., 2017: Erosion potential of the Yangtze Delta under sediment
starvation and climate change. Sci Rep., 7(1), 10535.

Yao, R.-J. et al, 2015: Determining soil salinity and plant biomass response
for a farmed coastal cropland using the electromagnetic induction method.
Comput. Flectron. Agr, 119, 241-253.

Yates, K.K., D.G. Zawada, N.A. Smiley and G. Tiling-Range, 2017: Divergence
of seafloor elevation and sea level rise in coral reef ecosystems.
Biogeosciences, 14(6), 1739.

Yau, A.M., M. Bender, A. Robinson and E. Brook, 2016: Reconstructing the last
interglacial at Summit, Greenland: Insights from GISP2. PNAS, 113(35),
9710-9715, doi:10.1073/pnas.1524766113.

Yeager, S. and G. Danabasoglu, 2014: The origins of late-twentieth-century
variations in the large-scale North Atlantic circulation. £ Clim., 27(9),
3222-3247.

Yi, S., K. Heki and A. Qian, 2017: Acceleration in the global mean sea level rise:
2005-2015. Geophys. Res. Lett., 44(23), 11,905-11,913.

Yin, J., 2012: Century to multi-century sea level rise projections from CMIP5
models. Geophys. Res. Lett., 39(17), 1-7, doi:10.1029/2012GL052947.
Yin, J., M.E. Schlesinger and R.J. Stouffer, 2009: Model projections of rapid
sea level rise on the northeast coast of the United States. Nat. Geosci.,

2(4), 262.

Yin, J., M. Ye, Z. Yin and S. Xu, 2015: A review of advances in urban flood risk
analysis over China. Stoch. Env. Res. Risk A., 29(3), 1063-1070.

Yin, J. et al, 2011: Monitoring urban expansion and land use/land cover
changes of Shanghai metropolitan area during the transitional economy
(1979-2009) in China. Environ. Monit. Assess., 177(1-4), 609-621.

Yin, J. et al, 2013: Modelling the combined impacts of sea level rise and
land subsidence on storm tides induced flooding of the Huangpu River in
Shanghai, China. Clim. Change, 119(3-4), 919-932.

Yu, H., E. Rignot, H. Seroussi and M. Morlighem, 2018: Retreat of Thwaites
Glacier, West Antarctica, over the next 100 years using various ice flow
models, ice shelf melt scenarios and basal friction laws. The Cryosphere
Discussions, 12(12), 3861-3876, doi:10.5194/tc-2018-104.

Yusuf, J.-E. et al., 2016: The sea is rising... but not onto the policy agenda:
A multiple streams approach to understanding sea level rise policies.
Environ. Plan. C., 34(2), 228-243.

Yusuf, J.-E. W. et al, 2018: Participatory GIS as a Tool for Stakeholder
Engagement in Building Resilience to Sea Level Rise: A Demonstration
Project. Mar. Technol Soc. 4, 52(2), 45-55.

Yusuf, J.E., B. St. John Ill, M. Covi and J.G. Nicula, 2018b: Engaging Stakeholders
in Planning for Sea Level Rise and Resilience. 4 Contemp. Water Res. Educ.,
164(1), 112-123.

Yuzva, K., W.W. Botzen, J. Aerts and R. Brouwer, 2018: A global review of the
impact of basis risk on the functioning of and demand for index insurance.
Int. L Disast. Risk Reduc., 28, 845-853.
Sea Level Rise and Implications for Low-Lying Islands, Coasts and Communities Chapter 4

Zappa, G., L.C. Shaffrey and K.1. Hodges, 2013: The ability of CMIP5 models to
simulate North Atlantic extratropical cyclones. £ Clim., 26(15), 5379-5396.

Zemp, M. et al., 2019: Global glacier mass changes and their contributions
to sea level rise from 1961 to 2016. Nature, 568(7752), 382-386,
doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1071-0.

Zhang, K. et al., 2012: The role of mangroves in attenuating storm surges.
Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci., 102, 11-23.

Zhang, L.-Y., 2003: Economic development in Shanghai and the role of the
state. Urban Studies, 40(8), 1549-1572.

Zhang, X. and J. A. Church, 2012: Sea level trends, interannual and decadal
variability in the Pacific Ocean. Geophys. Res. Lett., 39(21).

Zheng, L. et al., 2017: Impact of salinity and Pb on enzyme activities of a
saline soil from the Yellow River delta: A microcosm study. Phys. Chem.
Earth, 97, 77-87.

Zhu, X.,M.M. Linham and R.J. Nicholls, 2010: 7echnologies for Climate Change
Adaptation: Coastal Erosion and Flooding. TNA Guidebook Series, Roskilde:
Danmarks Tekniske Universitet, Riso Nationallaboratoriet for Baeredygtig
Energi [Available at: http://orbit.dtu.dk/files/5699563/Technologies%20
for%20Climate%20Change%20Adaptation-Coastal%20Erosion%20
and%20Flooding.pdf]. Accessed: 2019/09/20.

Zickfeld, K., S$. Solomon and D.M. Gilford, 2017: Centuries of thermal sea
level rise due to anthropogenic emissions of short-lived greenhouse gases.
PNAS, 114(4), 657-662, doi:10.1073/pnas. 1612066114.

Ziervogel, G., 2019: Building transformative capacity for adaptation planning
and implementation that works for the urban poor: Insights from South
Africa. Ambio, 48(5), 1-13.

Ziervogel, G., E. Archer van Garderen and P. Price, 2016a: Strengthening the
knowledge—policy interface through co-production of a climate adaptation
plan: leveraging opportunities in Bergrivier Municipality, South Africa.
Environ. Urban., 28(2), 455-474.

Ziervogel, G., J. Waddell, W. Smit and A. Taylor, 2016b: Flooding in Cape Town's
informal settlements: barriers to collaborative urban risk governance.
South African Geographical Journal, 98(1), 1-20.

Zwally, H.J. et al, 2002: Surface Melt-Induced Acceleration of Greenland Ice
sheet Flow. Science, 297(5579), 218-222, doi:10.1126/science.1072708.

 

445
