Task Force on
Climate-related
Financial Disclosures
 

Contents

A. Overview and Background
1. Overview

2. Background

B. Scope and Approach
1. Organizations in Scope
2. Approach

3. Key Considerations

C. Climate-Related Metrics

_

. Characteristics of Effective Climate-Related Metrics
. Disclosing Climate-Related Metrics

. Driving Toward Comparability: Cross-Industry Metric Categories

S © NN

. Portfolio Alignment Metrics for the Financial Sector
D. Climate-Related Targets
1. Characteristics of Effective Climate-Related Targets

2. Disclosing Climate-Related Targets

E. Transition Plans

_

. Characteristics of Effective Transition Plans

N

. Transition Plan Considerations

U

. Disclosing Transition Plan Information

F. Financial Impacts
1. Inputs for Estimating Financial Impacts

2. Disclosing Financial Impacts

Appendix 1: Further Information on Select Cross-Industry,
Climate-Related Metric Categories

1. Scope 3 GHG Emissions

2. Internal Carbon Prices
Appendix 2: Example Disclosures
Appendix 3: Glossary and Abbreviations

Appendix 4: References

ps

D M NN

29
31
35

38
40
aî
43

45
48
49

54

54
59

61

65

68
 

Fr

Overview and
Background

a
LR à
e F ns
De A
el D «
ce F ”
o +
LPC
0 AN A
ne © a
CL ES
CRT o
0
OR Ce
Re
.* ve
0 #1
nn PT
cé
Ce
L.2
der
CORTE)
ol
ee"

0 {
“ la oO
sc.

0

 
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

À. Overview and Background

 

1. OVERVIEW

 

When the Task Force on Climate-related
Financial Disclosures (the Task Force or TCFD)
issued its final recommendations in June 2017
(2017 report), it understood the early nature
of climate-related reporting and anticipated
that disclosure would evolve as climate-related
financial reporting matured.'

Over the past few years, several market

and industry initiatives have focused on
converging reporting standards that cover
climate issues as well as aligning and improving
comparability of climate-related metrics

{Box A, p. 3). These efforts include work to
harmonize greenhouse gas (GHG) accounting
methods to allow financial organizations to
consistently measure GHG emissions financed
by their loans and investments (referred to as
financed emissions). In addition, many nations
and organizations have committed to climate
targets, such as those related to “net-zero” and
the Paris Agreement.? These commitments
have led users of climate-related financial
disclosures — investors, lenders, and insurance
underwriters — to increasingly seek decision-

useful information on organizations’ plans and
progress to move to a low-carbon economy,
referred to as transition plans, including the
use of associated climate-related metrics and
targets to track such progress.

Since 2017, the Task Force has soughtto

clarify issues raised by organizations in their
implementation of the TCFD recommendations
and provide additional supporting guidance and
other information where appropriate. To address
recent developments and feedback from users,
preparers, and others, this document provides
additional guidance for preparers regarding
disclosures of climate-related metrics and targets
and key information from transition plans.

The Task Force also modified certain aspects

of its 2017 implementing the Recommendations
ofthe Task Force on Climate-related Financial
Disclosures (2017 annex) to provide additional
guidance on disclosing metrics, targets, and
transition plan information in line with the TCFD
recommendations (2021 annex).?

 

The TaskForce’s 2017 report states ‘as understanding, data analytics, and modeling of climate-related issues becomes
more widespread, disclosures can mature accordingly" (p. 41)

? United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, “Paris Agreement,” December 2015, According to the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in order to keep warmingto 1.5°C, GHG emissions must reach “net-zero” by 2050. The “net” in net-zero
means any residual GHG emissions from hard-to-abate industries need to be removed from the atmosphere through technology or

nature-based solutions

3 TCFD, /mplementing the Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (2017 annex), June 29, 2017;
TCFD, Implementing the Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (2021 annex), October 14, 2021
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Box A1
Market and Industry Developments
Global Standard Convergence

* In December 2020, à group of sustainability
standard setters — CDP, the Climate Disclosure
Standards Board (CDSB), the Global Reporting
Initiative (GRI}, the International Integrated
Reporting Council (IRC), and the Sustainability
Accounting Standards Board (SASB), referred
to herein as the “the Alliance” — published à
prototype climate-related financial disclosure
standard. The prototype outlines a shared vision
that integrates both financial accounting and
sustainability disclosure and builds on the TCFD
recommendations.

In February 2021, The International Financial
Reporting Standards (IFRS) Foundation Trustees
{Trustees) announced plans to produce à proposal
for the establishment of à sustainability
standards board.

In February 2021, the International Organization
of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) welcomed

the announcement from the Trustees and

further welcomed the Alliance prototype “as a
potential basis for the [International Sustainability
Standards Board {ISSB)] to develop climate-
related reporting standards."

In March 2021, the Trustees announced their
strategic direction and established à working
group to accelerate convergence in global
sustainability reporting standards, building on the
“well-established work” of both the TCFD and the
Alliance. The working group is chaired by the IFRS
Foundation and includes participation from CDSB,
the International Accounting Standards Board, IIRC,
SASB, TCFD, and the World Economic Forum (WEF).

* InJune 2021, I0SCO released à Report on
Sustainability-related Issuer Disclosures providing
more details on gaps in current sustainability
reporting as well as IOSCO's vision for the ISSB.

Improving Comparability of Climate-Related
Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans

* In September 2019, the Corporate Reporting
Dialogue released à report mapping the alignment
between the TCFD's recommended disclosures
and CPP, GRI, and SASB indicators, which showed
broad alignment across metrics.

* In April 2020, the CRO Forum, a group of Chief
Risk Officers from large multinational insurance
companies, released the Carbon Footprinting
Methodology for Underwriting Portfolios, which
describes an approach for insurance underwriters to
calculate a weighted average carbon intensity metric.

In November 2020, the Partnership for Carbon
Accounting Financials (PCAF) released the Global
GHG Accounting and Reporting Standard for the
Financial Industry, which outlines methodologies
for measuring financed emissions for specific asset
classes in line with the GHG Protocol.

In April 2021, the United Nations launchedthe
Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ)
to bring together various financial-sector alliances
focused on net-zero GHG emissions targets by
mid-century.

In April 2021, the Science Based Targets initiative
{SBTi) released its Financial Sector Science-Based
Targets Guidance.The guidance encourages
financial institutions to use PCAF'sS Global GHG
Accounting and Reporting Standard to measure
financed emissions.

In April 2021, the European Commission issued
a proposed Corporate Sustainability Reporting
Directive that would amend existing reporting
requirements to include à broader range of
companies and require sustainability reporting
according to standards to be developed bythe
European Financial Reporting Advisory Group.5
The reporting standards would specifythe
information companies should report, including
climate-related metrics and targets.

Throughout 2019, 2020, and 2021, the World
Business Council for Sustainable Development
{WBCSD) published four reports to help non-
financial companies implement the TCFD
recommendations, including by providing sector-
specific metrics and case studies. These TCFD
Preparer Forums focused on the Electric Utilities;
Construction and Building Materials; Food,
Agriculture, and Forest Products; and Auto sectors.

##Securities regulators and other capital market authorities are responsible for the oversight of capital markets. This oversight

responsibility generally includes the development, application and enforcement of accounting standards, auditing standards,
and disclosure regulations." IOSCO, Report on Sustainability-related Issuer Disclosures, June 2021, p.1

5 The proposed Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive would amend the existing requirements under the Non-Financial Reporting

Directive. For an overview of relevant amendments, see the European Commission's “Corporate sustainability reporting."
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

 

2. BACKGROUND

 

The Task Force was created to develop
voluntary, consistent climate-related financial
disclosures that would be useful to investors,
lenders, and insurance underwriters in
appropriately assessing and pricing climate-
related risks (Figure A1 shows the Task
Force's recommendations). Without the

right information, investors and others may
incorrectly price or value financial assets,
leading to a misallocation of capital.

Accurate and timely disclosure of the actual and
potential impacts of climate-related risks and
opportunities on an organization is fundamental
to pricing risks. In addition, recognizing the
importance of disclosing potential impacts
associated with climate change, the Task Force
asks organizations to describe the resilience of
their strategies under different climate-related
scenarios and encourages certain non-financial
organizations to describe potential qualitative
or quantitative financial implications of the
climate-related scenarios used.f

Unfortunately, organizations’ disclosure of the
resilience of their strategies under different
climate-related scenarios is relatively low.’

Figure Af

TCED Recommendations

As described in the Task Force's four annual
status reports, this information consistently has
the lowest level of disclosure across the Task
Force’s 11 recommended disclosures.

To monitor and promote implementation of
its recommendations, the Task Force engages
in formal and informal consultations and
discussions with users, preparers, and other
stakeholders. As part of those efforts, the
Task Force has confirmed with users that such
financial impact information is an important
element in their assessments.

Based on a comprehensive survey of the specific
types of climate-related information that
investors, lenders, and insurance underwriters
find the most useful, the Task Force found
users were nearly unanimous in identifying

the actual impact of climate-related issues on
an organization's businesses and strategy as
the most useful. When asked to rank specific
types of information that could be disclosed

to describe a range of impacts, including both
financial and non-financial, users were nearly
unanimous in identifying financial impacts on
capital expenditures and capital allocation as
most useful. When asked about the most useful
information organizations could disclose when

The Task Force’s recommendations on climate-related financial disclosures are structured around four thematic
areas that represent core elements of how companies operate: governance, strategy, risk management, and

metrics and targets.*

Disclose the actual and
potential impacts of
climate-related risks and
opportunities on the
company's businesses,
strategy, and financial
planning where such
information is material.

Disclose the company's
governance around
climate-related risks and
opportunities.

Disclose the metrics and
targets used to assess
and manage relevant
climate-related risks
and opportunities where
such information is
material.

Disclose how the
company identifies,
assesses, and manages
climate-related risks.

*The four recommendations are supported by 11 recommended disclosures intended to help investors and others understand how reporting

organizations assess and address climate-related risks and opportunities

$Inthe context ofthe TCED recommendations, “non-financial organizations” refer to those organizations within the four sector groups
specified in the 2017 report: (1) Energy, (2) Transportation, (3) Materials and Buildings, and (4) Agriculture, Food, and Forest Products

7 TCFD recommended disclosure Strategy o), including information on potential financial impact, consistently has the lowest level of disclosure
in the Task Force’s annual reviews of publichy available reporting: TCFD, 2027 status report, October 14, 2021, p. 30; TCFD, 2020 status report,
October 2020, p. 11; TCFD, 2079 status report, June 2019, p. 8; TCFD, 2078 status report, September 2018, p.9
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

describing the resiliency of their strategies

to climate-related issues — in other words,
potential impact — users identified an indication
of the direction or ranges of potential financial
implications under different climate-related
scenarios as most useful. For a summary of the
complete survey results, please see the Task
Force's 2020 status report.®

Given the importance to users of information
describing the actual and potential financial
impacts of climate-related issues on
organizations and the low levels of disclosure
associated with the latter, the Task Force
undertook work in 2021 to better understand
the types of information organizations use to
describe the financial impacts associated with
climate change and challenges associated with
making such disclosures.

Based on the Task Force’s findings (as described
in its 2021 status report) as well as market and
industry developments, the Task Force believes
it is critical to reinforce the importance of
organizations disclosing the actual and potential
financial impacts of climate change on their
businesses and strategies to support users’
assessments. In addition, based on feedback
through interviews and the Task Force's 2021
public consultation on its Proposed Guidance on
Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans, users are
keenly interested in organizations disclosing
certain fundamental categories of metrics that
are critical inputs for measuring financial risk. 1°

The Task Force developed this guidance to
support preparers in disclosing decision-useful
metrics, targets, and transition plan information
and linking those disclosures with estimates of
financial impacts. Such information will enable
users to appropriately assess their investment
and lending risks.

8 TCFD, 2020 status report, pp. 27-34 and 93-103

3 For more information on the interviews, see TCFD, 2021 status report, p. 58

The remainder of this document is organized
as follows:

* Section B. Scope and Approach. This section
outlines the types of organizations addressed
in this report, the approach the Task Force took
to develop this guidance, as well as some key
considerations for preparers.

Section C. Climate-Related Metrics. This
section provides information on selecting and
disclosing metrics, including the Task Force's
view on a set of metrics that all organizations
should disclose.

* Section D. Climate-Related Targets. This
section provides guidance on selecting and
disclosing climate-related targets as well as
details on the role of scenario analysis in
determining targets.

* Section E. Transition Plans. This section
describes how organizations might include
aspects of their transition plans in their
climate-related financial disclosures.

* Section F. Financial Impacts. This section
underscores the way in which climate-related
metrics, targets, and information from
transition plans provide useful underlying
information with which to estimate the actual
or potential impact of climate-related issues
on an organization's financial performance
and position.

1 For à summary of responses from the consultation, see TCFD, Proposed Guidance on Metrics, Targets,

and Transition Plans Consultation: Summary of Responses, October 14, 2021
 

B.
Scope ano

Approach |

D C F
A nr
CE
LU E
CPC ar J
Pad rh D
2 0
” Le nd " LS h 0 , .
Es mn pe U . LL 0 ps
à, 2 5 ! > 4 J 6 d L L . . mn u
ES e"
ou
PL. Cu ". a, o É
PL 3 mn mn LU < a s a LU . a"
PL 2 . Û È CR
x L1
: 0 0 E a
ARE mn A x * 2 NE LL a . AL
0 , pd
a : Ë , ° CRT.
Û , mn ” M a " D
Ê 0
” PL, a F Un P a n s - À Le
0 “hs . a PE .e PL FC 0 _
L | . "LL Pa er pet CHE.
nd pd 0 e * 2 PC ACL
. m7 ee * " | PL EC
a " CL ce. "A RAR LL Sn 2.
. - RH L v. = d D  d . Li JL ” L 7” À LS » ..d » » .
0 CR RER LL RATE RTE STEEL
RAR TR AN NN LOS Sd dd SAME CESR
CRE SEL LOUER RS ESS A SERRE CT
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures
B. Scope and Approach

Organizations implementing the Task Force's
recommendations come from various industries
and use a wide range of strategies, metrics, and
targets to assess and manage their climate-
related risks and opportunities. The Task Force
acknowledges that many informative climate-
related metrics and targets will be specific to an
organization's industry or business model."

However, the Task Force received feedback
through à number of channels related to
implementation of the Strategy and Metrics

and Targets recommendations that warranted
further TCFD guidance. To address this feedback,
the Task Force focuses this guidance on several
key aspects of metrics, targets, and transition
plans it believes most organizations can disclose
to enhance their climate-related reporting.

 

1. ORGANIZATIONS IN SCOPE

 

In developing this document, the Task Force
considered the types of organizations that might
benefit most from additional guidance. This
guidance is intended to cover a wide range of

 

organizations. As with its recommendations in In addition, the Task Force held two public
general, the Task Force expects this guidance to consultations on elements ofits Strategy and
be useful to organizations of all sizes and located  Metrics and Targets recommendations over
in various countries around the world. the past year to understand current preparer

practices on disclosure, including challenges
regarding implementation, and to collect input
from users on the types of climate-related
information that would be more useful.

 

2. APPROACH

 

As part of monitoring adoption of its
recommendations, the Task Force has

formally solicited stakeholder input on specific
implementation issues. Although analysis of
public company reporting shows that metrics
and targets is one of the highest areas of
disclosure, the majority of respondents to a 2019
Task Force survey on implementation found the
Metrics and Targets recommendation “somewhat
difficult” or “very difficult” to implement."?

Respondents that identified as preparers stated +_In June 2021, the Task Force released a draft

+ The October 2020 Forward-Looking Financial
Sector Metrics Consultation (consultation on
forward-looking metrics) solicited views on
decision-useful, forward-looking metrics to be
disclosed by financial organizations, requesting
feedback on forward-looking metrics that have
gained interest from the financial sector in
recent years and the challenges and usefulness
of such metrics.'?

that increased standardization of metrics and version of this guidance for consultation, the
targets would ease implementation challenges, Proposed Guidance on Climate-related Metrics,
while respondents that identified as users noted Targets, and Transition Plans (consultation
increased standardization would help drive on metrics, targets, and transition plans).4
toward comparability across companies’ climate- The consultation asked preparers to provide
related financial disclosures. information on their disclosure of certain

The Task Force welcomes the ongoing work of existing standards setters, industry associations, and similar organizations
that are best positioned to develop industry-specific dimate-related frameworks or standards

12 TCFD, 2027 status report, p. 30; TCFD, 2020 status report, p. 11; TCFD, 2079 status report, p. 8; TCFD, 2078 status report, p. 9
1 TCFD, Forward-Looking Hinancial Sector Metrics Consultation, October 2020

4 TCFD, Proposed Guidance on Climate-related Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans, June 7, 2021; Portfolio Alignment Team,
Measuring Portfolio Alignment: Technical Supplement, June 7, 2021
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

metrics, targets, and transition plan elements,
as well as the challenges of disclosure, and

for users to assess the usefulness of such
disclosures. The consultation also asked about
proposed updates to the supplemental guidance
for financial sectors, including on disclosure

of Scope 3 GHG emissions and alignment of
financial sector business activities with a 2°C
or lower GHG emissions pathway (“portfolio
alignment”}." In addition, respondents provided
input on developments and changes in user
expectations since the original guidance was
released in 2017.

Responses to these public consultations allowed
the Task Force to better assess the burden of
disclosure on preparers as well as the need for
consistent and decision-useful information for
users, a balance that is foundational to the Task
Force's work. Based on the over 400 responses
received through both consultations, the Task
Force has clarified and simplified the proposed
guidance and updated specific sections of its
Implementing the Recommendations of the Task
Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures
(2021 annex).'5

The Task Force’s guidance for all sectors released
in 2017 explicitly or implicitly addresses the

Figure B1

topics covered in this guidance. Nevertheless,
the Task Force believes it is critical to emphasize
the importance of disclosing certain climate-
related metrics and targets and to explicitly
address the types of information organizations
should disclose as it relates to their plans for
transitioning to a low-carbon economy, where
such disclosures are appropriate.

 

3. KEY CONSIDERATIONS

 

The Task Force encourages preparers to read
the guidance in the context of the following
considerations.

Principles for Effective Disclosures. To
underpin its recommendations and help guide
developments in climate-related financial
reporting, the Task Force developed a set of
fundamental principles for effective disclosure
{Figure B1). These principles can help achieve
high-quality and decision-useful disclosures

that enable users to understand the impact

of climate change on organizations. The Task
Force encourages organizations adopting its
recommendations to consider these principles as
they develop climate-related financial disclosures.

Principles for Effective Disclosures

 

l

PEAR EU date e Lee
Eu A Eee
information

S

PEAR date U 1e)
be comparable
among companies
within a sector,

LEE de "AIS Taie LT)

y

Disclosures should
be specific and
TT

6

Disclosures

should bereliable,
verifiable,

and objective

E

PEAR EU Rte LUI
be clear, balanced,
and understandable

7

PEAR EU Rte LUI
be provided on
a timely basis

nl

PEAR AUS date e Lee
be consistent
OST

 

1 Though the language released for consultation referenced à 2°C or lower temperature pathway, the Task Force recommendation
on portfolio alignment has been updated to reference article two ofthe 2015 Paris Agreement, which commits parties to “holding
the increasing in the global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the
temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels" (emphasis added)

16 TCFD, Implementing the Recommendations ofthe Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (2021 annex), October 14, 2021
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

The Task Force’s disclosure principles are
informed by the qualitative and quantitative
characteristics of financial information and
further the overall goals of the Task Force to
promote more effective climate-related financial
disclosure. The principles, taken together, are
designed to assist organizations in making clear
the linkages and connections between
climate-related issues and their governance,
strategy, risk management, and metrics and
targets. The Task Forces fundamental principles
for effective disclosure are described in Appendix
3 of the TCFD 2017 report.

Cross-Industry Metric Categories. In Section
C. Climate-Related Metrics, the Task Force
identifies a set of climate-related metric
categories that all organizations should disclose,
where data and methodologies allow. It is
important to note that the cross-industry metric
categories do not prescribe the exact metrics
and units of measure to be used. Rather, they
reflect broader categories of information that
investors, lenders, and insurance underwriters
find useful in making financial decisions. The
Task Force recognizes that organizations

may operationalize the metric categories in
different ways most relevant to their industry,
capabilities, and business model. Therefore,
the metric categories help drive toward further
comparability in disclosure in response to
market feedback, but also allow flexibility for
organizations, industries, standard setters, and
jurisdictions to develop specific climate-related
metrics within those defined categories.

Financial Sector Metrics. This guidance
primarily addresses all types of organizations;
however, there are certain areas in which it
provides specific considerations for financial
sector organizations due to the nature oftheir
business activity. For example, within Scope

3 GHG emissions reporting, financial sector
organizations are specifically encouraged

to disclose GHG emissions related to their
investing, lending, and underwriting activities.

In addition, following the Task Force's consultation
on forward-looking metrics, this guidance
discusses the disclosure of the alignment

of a financial organization’s business activities
with a temperature pathway well below 2°C
(“portfolio alignment”}) in Sub-Section C.4.
Portfolio Alignment Metrics for the Financial
Sector. The Task Force requested that an
independent group of expert analysts from
financial organizations (the Portfolio Alignment
Team) develop technical considerations
outlining its views on developing portfolio
alignment metrics and areas of further work
as a resource for organizations interested in
exploring portfolio alignment.if

Transition Plans. While the Task Force's Strategy
recommendation asks for disclosure of the
actual and potential impacts of climate-related
risks and opportunities on the organization's
businesses, strategy, and financial planning,
reporting on transition plans has emerged

more recently as important to users. Therefore,
guidance on transition plans is provided in
Section E. Transition Plans and in the 2021 annex
to assist preparers with developing disclosures
that meet current user expectations.

Implementation Over Time. The Task Force
recognizes that some areas addressed in

this guidance are still maturing. While some
organizations already disclose the information in
this guidance today, others may need additional
time to source appropriate data as well as
update their internal processes and reporting
capabilities before publicly disclosing some
elements. The Task Force encourages reporting
based on the updated 2021 annex to be
implemented as soon as possible.

1 Artide two ofthe 2015 Paris Agreement commits parties to “holding the increasing in the global average temperature to well
below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels."

18 Portfolio Alignment Team, Measuring Portfolio Alignment: Technical Considerations, October 2021
 

 
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

C. Climate-Related Metrics

This section aims to support organizations’
disclosure of climate-related metrics by
discussing characteristics of effective climate-
related metrics, describing the types of
information organizations should consider
including in their disclosure of climate-related
metrics, and setting out categories of metrics for
disclosure across industries. It provides further
details on these cross-industry, climate-related
metric categories, including example disclosures.
The section also includes discussion of metrics
with which to measure the alignment of financial
sector business activities with GHG emissions
reduction goals.

As described in Figure A1 (p. 4), the Task Force's
recommendations are structured around four
thematic areas that represent core elements
of how organizations operate — governance,
strategy, risk management, and metrics and
targets. While all four recommendations are
interrelated, the Task Force views metrics

as the “connective tissue” between the
recommendations (Box C1).

 

1. CHARACTERISTICS OF EFFECTIVE
CLIMATE-RELATED METRICS

 

Many sources offer guidance on how to select
business-relevant metrics.® In particular, the
Task Force believes that climate-related metrics
should have several characteristics to help them
meet the Task Force's fundamental principles for
effective disclosure.2?

Decision-Useful. Climate-related metrics help
organizations understand potential impacts of
climate-related risks and opportunities over a
specified time period, including financial impacts
and operational consequences. To be
decision-useful, these metrics should be relevant
to the organization's risks and opportunities

and show how the organization manages such
risks and opportunities as part of its governance,
strategy, and risk management processes.

Box C1
Relationship between Metrics
and Other TCFD Recommendations

Climate-related metrics should inform, and be
informed by, the organization’s governance,
strategy, and risk management processes and
create a feedback loop over time in the same
way that other key performance indicators and
key risk indicators are used to inform business
management processes.

* Governance. Climate-related metrics enable
an organization's board and management
to more effectively direct the business by
measuring and describing the impacts of
climate-related risks and opportunities on
the organization — recommended disclosures
Governance a} and b). Metrics are also essential
for informing investors, lenders, insurance
underwriters, and other stakeholders about
how senior management tracks and manages
climate-related risks and opportunities. Climate-
related metrics, such as remuneration, can show
how directors and managers are incentivized to
achieve climate-related objectives.

Strategy. Climate-related metrics are critical

to measuring and describing the impact of
climate-related risks and opportunities on the
organization’s businesses, strategy, and financial
planning — recommended disclosure Strategy b)
— and the resilience of an organization's
strategy under different climate-related
scenarios — recommended disclosure Strategy c).

Risk Management. Climate-related metrics
support the measurement of risk exposures

and levels as part of an organization's broader
risk management processes. In conjunction

with risk tolerances, risk appetites, and risk
thresholds, climate-related metrics informthe
degree of risk that the organization is prepared to
accept andits risk responses (e.g., accept, avoid,
pursue, reduce, share/transfer) — recommended
disclosures Risk Management a) and b}. Additional
information is provided in the TCFD's Guidance on
Risk Management Integration and Disclosure,
published on October 29, 2020.

18 For example: SASB, SASB Conceptual Framework, February 2017, p. 19; van Oudenhoven, et al. key criteria for developing
ecosystem service indicators to inform decision making, August 14, 2018; Shah, “Measuring What Matters: How To Pick
A Good Metric," March 29, 2013; Eckerson, 12 Characteristics of Effective Metrics,” April 19, 2010; Weber, et al,
Exploring Metrics to Measure the Climate Progress of Banks, May 24, 2018; and Hoffmann, and Busch, “Corporate Carbon
Performance Indicators: Carbon intensity, Dependency, Exposure, and Risk," November 11, 2008

20 TCFD, 2077 report, June 29, 2017 pp. 51-53
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Clear and Understandable. Disclosure of
climate-related metrics is most effective when
metrics are presented in a manner that aids
understanding (e.g., both aggregated and
disaggregated, where useful; clear labeling),
including clear articulation of any limitations
and cautions. Climate-related metrics should
provide important context around such
points as management’s thinking in terms of
goal setting, internal process management,
and communication objectives and should
be supported by contextual and supporting
narrative information on items such as
organizational boundaries, governance,
methodologies, and basis of preparation.

Reliable, Verifiable, and Objective. Climate-
related metrics support effective internal
controls for the purposes of data verification and
assurance. Climate-related metrics should be
free from bias and value judgment so that they
yield an objective disclosure of performance that
users can leverage regardless of their worldview
or outlook.

Consistent over Time. There are three time
horizons that are relevant to climate-related
metrics: current, historical, and forward-looking,
which are defined as follows:

* Current. Current period data, outlining
most recent reporting period and covering
the same period as the current period in the
organization's financial filings (e.g., 12 months
year to date).

Historical. Data for the period(s) prior tothe
current period, covering at a minimum the same
period as in the organization's financial filings.2!

Figure C1
Time Horizon

Historical Current
Climate-Related — Climate-Related
Metrics Metrics

— —

* Forward-Looking. Future period data,
covering short-, medium, and long-termtime
horizons. Forward-looking metrics may be
based on methodologies such as scenario
analysis, trend analysis, sensitivity analysis,
and simulations, as well as commitments and
climate-related targets. Unlike historical and
current data, forward-looking data are usually
more appropriately reported as ranges based
on assumptions about the future state ofthe
world, often tied to one or more plausible
climate scenarios. Forward-looking reporting
is most useful when it is presented along with
information on the designated time horizon,
methodologies, and scenarios used, as well as
key assumptions.

It is helpful for preparers to disclose climate-
related metrics consistently from year to year in
order to facilitate comparative and trend analysis
and to clearly identify the time horizon over which
climate-related metrics are measured. Climate-
related metrics are most effective when the same
item is reported across all time periods as shown
in Figure C1. Measuring the same metrics over
time provides a way to track progress.

Disclosure of GHG emissions, for example, could
include data on the organization's previous

GHG emissions levels, the amount of GHG
emissions in the organization's current reporting
period — including an indication of progress
against GHG-specific targets — and a forward-
looking range for future GHG emissions.

Informed by:
Climate goal

Forward-Looking
” Climate-Related
and high-level Metrics

climate strategy
Targets

Scenario #1,2,3
Projections
Transition Plan

21 TCFD encourages organizations to provide at least two years of historical data in order to provide a basis for tracking progress
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

 

2. DISCLOSING CLIMATE-RELATED
METRICS

 

Effective disclosure of climate-related metrics
generally involves providing metrics along

with contextual and supporting narrative

to help users understand the meaning and

use of climate-related metrics and the basis

on which they have been prepared. Climate-
related metrics, and associated narrative,
should be integrated with an organization's
other disclosures to provide a coherent set of
information on the organization's climate-related
risks and opportunities and actual and potential
financial impacts. Organizations should also
consider which metrics to present as point
estimates and which to present as ranges or
qualitative categories, and whether to include
the level of confidence associated with the value
ofthe metric.

In presenting climate-related metrics and
associated contextual information in their
disclosures, an organization should consider
providing the following, where relevant:

+ Types of measurements used, including
whether information comes from direct
measurements, estimates, proxy indicators,
or financial and management accounting
processes.

* Methodologies and definitions used,
including the scope of application, data
sources, critical factors or parameters,
assumptions, and limitations of the
methodology. For example, the GHG Protocol
suggests that organizations discuss GHG
emissions factors, scope, and boundaries.
For metrics informed by scenario analysis,
organizations should include information
on which climate scenarios were used and
their assumptions and limitations (Box C2).
Organizations should also provide context if
they adjust the methodology or definition of
particular metrics.

Trend data to allow for consideration of

how metrics have changed in absolute and
relative amounts over time, including whether
acquisitions, divestments, or policies have
affected results.

How results are connected with business
units, company strategy, and financial
performance and position. Where it aids
understanding, organizations should consider
disaggregating information by categories such
as geographic area, business unit, asset, type,
upstream and downstream activities, source,
and vulnerability of area.

How value chains will be affected over
time by climate-related transition and
physical risks, including life cycle GHG
emissions reporting.

Reconciliation with financial accounting
standards, if needed. If climate-related
metrics are presented in financial terms,
disclosures should clarify how such metrics
reconcile with financial accounting standards
and explain any differences.

Box C2
Importance of Disclosing Details on
Climate-Related Scenario Analysis

As noted in the 2020 TCFD Guidance on Scenario
Analysis for Non-Financial Companies, users
desire greater transparency into the types of
scenarios preparers are using and their impact
on the organization's strategy. In particular,
preparers should “describe processes used for
scenario analysis; the range and assumptions

of scenarios used; key findings; whetheritis à
standalone analysis or integrated with company's
risk management and strategy processes,” TCFD,
Guidance on Scenario Analysis for Non-Financial
Companies, October 29, 2020, p. 45.

Using a common set of scenarios and inputs

(e.8., parameters, timelines, industry-specific
metrics, methodologies) increases comparability
across companies, provides greater reliability

and relevance, and can help reduce the resources
required by preparers to develop scenarios in-
house. On the other hand, using à common set of
scenarios across organizations may reduce their
ability to assess their individual situations and how
climate-related risks may uniquely affect them, and
thus could increase concentration of risk.

22 For more information see, for example, Section 3,5 Key Performance Indicators (pp. 12-20) within the European
Commission, Guidelines on non-financial reporting: Supplement on reporting climate-related information, June 20, 2019

23 TCFD, 2027 annex, pp. 7-8, provides more detail on location of disclosure
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

 

3. DRIVING TOWARD COMPARABILIT Y:
CROSS-INDUSTRY METRIC
CATEGORIES

 

Climate-related metrics can be generally
categorized into two groups — those that

apply to all organizations (cross-industry) and
those that are specific to an industry (industry-
specific).# In its 2020 status report, the Task
Force acknowledged industry associations,
standard setters, and similar organizations are
best positioned to identify and operationalize
industry-specific metrics and highlighted many
of the groups working on such metrics. Notably,
the IFRS Foundation has since announced plans
to establish the International Sustainability
Standards Board (ISSB) to meet the need for
globally consistent sustainability reporting?

The Task Force has identified seven categories
of climate-related metrics from the Task Force’s
11 recommended disclosures and guidance for
all sectors that all organizations should disclose
{Table C1, p. 16}, recognizing that for some
categories, implementation may take time as
data and methodologies evolve. The Task Force
encourages reporting based on the updated
2021 annex to be implemented as soon as
possible, as disclosure of metrics aligned with
these seven categories will support convergence
in the disclosure of key metrics.

Importantly, the seven metric categories

are not additions to the Metrics and Targets
recommendation as they relate to metrics that
have been part of the Task Force's recommended

disclosures and guidance for all sectors since
the release of its 2017 report. In selecting metric
categories, the Task Force sought to emphasize
categories that meet several criteria, as follows:

* indicative of many basic aspects and drivers of
climate-related risks and opportunities;

- useful for understanding how an organization
is managing climate-related risks and
opportunities;

* widely requested by climate reporting
frameworks, lenders, investors, insurance
underwriters, and regional and national
disclosure requirements; and,

+ key inputs for estimating financial impacts of
climate change on organizations.

The Task Force, however, is not a standard-
setting body and has defined metric
categories broadly to allow flexibility for
organizations, industries, and jurisdictions

to develop and adopt specific climate-related
metrics to support these metric categories. The
current ability of organizations and industries
to specify metrics applicable to these categories
will vary, and the state of methodologies and
data may need to further evolve in some areas.
The TCFD believes, however, that it is important
to articulate a common set of metric categories
to encourage industries and standard setters
to further operationalize specific metrics

that address each category. In the meantime,
preparers should use common taxonomies

or methodologies, where appropriate.

 

24 For further discussion ofthe distinction between cross-industry and industry-specific disclosures, see SASE,

Climate Risk Technical Bulletin, April 13, 2021, p. 21

25 FRS, Consultation Paper on Sustainability Reporting, September 2020; IFRS, “IFRS Foundation Trustees announce
next steps in response to broad demand for global sustainability standards," February 2,2021
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

The Task Force recommends that preparers
disclose metrics consistent with the cross-
industry, climate-related metric categories for
the current, historical, and forward-looking
periods.# Forward-looking information,
particularly information related to the
organization's medium- and long-term time
horizons, may be more appropriate to report
as ranges, qualitative directions, or numbers
tied to specific assumptions about the future
state of the world, such as those informed

by scenario analysis.? It is also important to
note that the recommended disclosures within
both the Strategy and Metrics and Targets
recommendations are subject to materiality,
except for the disclosure of Scope 1 and Scope 2
GHG emissions (Box C3).

The Task Force encourages all preparers to begin
disclosing metrics consistent with the cross-
industry, climate-related metric categories, but
acknowledges not all will have the resources

to present quantitative information across

all metric categories. Instead, the Task Force
encourages organizations to begin where
resources and expertise allow; for example,
by disclosing qualitative information first or
focusing on the sectors, business lines, or assets
with the most significant climate-related risks
and opportunities and improving quantitative
disclosures over time.

Organizations typically use a wide variety of
information internally and externally to manage
their operations. These cross-industry,
climate-related metric categories are

not meant to supplant or replace other
information that organizations track as part
of their business planning or that industries
converge on to track climate-related risks

or opportunities specific to their industry or
organization. Rather, the Task Force intends
for this set of cross-industry metric categories
to provide a base of comparability across and
within industries and form a framework for
the types of climate-related metrics that all
organizations should report.

Box C3
Application of Materiality

When the Task Force released its
recommendations and implementing guidelines
in 2017, it noted that “[tlhe disclosures related
to the Strategy and Metrics and Targets
recommendations involve an assessment of
materiality” while the disclosures related to
governance and risk management do not.

As part of the Proposed Guidance on Metrics,
Targets, and Transition Plans, the Task Force
requested that respondents comment on whether
the cross-industry metric categories, or a subset
ofthem, should be disclosed independent of

an assessment of materiality.? Respondents
expressed strong support for disclosure of Scope
1 and Scope 2 GHG emissions independent of an
assessment of materiality, with 70% saying Scope
1 and Scope 2 GHG emissions should be disclosed.
An additional 47% supported disclosure of Scope
3 GHG emissions independent of a materiality
assessment.* Further analysis of open-text
responses highlighted the importance of Scope 1,
Scope 2, and Scope 3 GHG emissions information
as foundational data with which to assess climate-
related risks and opportunities. Disclosure ofthe
other metric categories was more mixed, with
33%-42% of respondents requesting disclosure
independent of a materiality assessment across
the remaining six categories.

Based on the consultation on metrics, targets,
and transition plans, the Task Force has updated
its 2021 annex to specify that “[tJhe Task Force
believes all organizations should disclose absolute
Scope 1 and Scope 2 GHG emissions independent
of a materiality assessment. The disclosure of
Scope 3 GHG emissions is subject to materiality;
however, the Task Force encourages organizations
to disclose such emissions."#l? The other
cross-industry, climate-related metric categories
remain subject to materiality. Organizations
should determine materiality for climate-related
metrics consistent with how they determine the
materiality of other information included in their
financial filings.

26 As noted in the 2021 annex, “Asset owners and asset managers should report to their beneficiaries and clients, respectively,
through existing means of financial reporting, where relevant and where feasible, Asset owners and asset managers are also
encouraged to disclose publicly via their websites or other public avenues ofdisclosure” (p. 8)

27 For more information, see TCFD, Guidance on Scenario Analysis for Non-Financial Companies, October 2020, pp. 46-51

28 TCFD, 2077 report, pp. 33-34; TCFD, 2077 annex, p. 3

23 TCFD, Proposed Guidance on Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans, June 7, 2021, p. 31

30 Forty-seven percent responded that Scope 3 GHG emissions should be discdosed irrespective of materiality; 43% responded
that they should be disclosed based on à materiality assessment; 10% were not sure. TCFD, Consultation on Proposed Guidance
on Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans: Summary of Responses, October 14, 2021

31 TCFD, 2027 annex, p. 7.

3 While the Task Force agreed that organizations should disclose Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions independent of a materiality
assessment, a few Task Force members preferred keeping such disclosures as subject to materiality,
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Table C1

Cross-Industry, Climate-Related Metric
Categories and Example Metrics

Example Unit
Metric Category of Measure*

Example Metrics

 

GHG Emissions MT of CO,e
Absolute Scope 1, Scope 2,
and Scope 3;%* emissions

+ Absolute Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3 GHG emissions

* Financed emissions by asset class

 

intensity Weighted average carbon intensity
+ GHG emissions per MWh of electricity produced
* Gross global Scope 1 GHG emissions covered under
emissions-limiting regulations
Transition Risks Amount + Volume of real estate collaterals highly exposed
Amount and extent or percentage to transition risk

of assets or business
activities vulnerable
to transition risks*

Concentration of credit exposure to carbon-related
assets

Percent of revenue from coal mining

Percent of revenue passenger kilometers not covered
by Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for
International Aviation (CORSIA)

 

Physical Risks Amount
Amount and extent or percentage
of assets or business

activities vulnerable

to physical risks*

Number and value of mortgage loans in 100-year
flood zones

Wastewater treatment capacity located in 100-year
flood zones

* Revenue associated with water withdrawn and
consumed in regions of high or extremely high
baseline water stress

Proportion of property, infrastructure, or other
alternative asset portfolios in an area subject
to flooding, heatstress, or water stress

Proportion of real assets exposed to 1:100
or 1:200 climate-related hazards

 

Climate-Related Amount
Opportunities or percentage
Proportion of revenue,

assets, or other business

activities aligned

with climate-related

opportunities

Net premiums written related to energy efficiency
and low-carbon technology

Number of {1} zero-emissions vehicles (ZEV), (2) hybrid
vehicles, and (3) plug-in hybrid vehicles sold

Revenues from products or services that support
the transition to a low-carbon economy

Proportion of homes delivered certified to a third-
party, multi-attribute green building standard

 

Continued on next page

33 The Task Force has noted the most common unit of measure. There are multiple ways to measure and disdose metrics, and
different jurisdictions or industries may follow different practices. Allowing for differences in units of measure can help provide
organizations with flexibility without significantly impacting comparability as long as units are clearly stated

34 The Task Force believes Scope 3 GHG emissions are an important metric reflecting an organization's exposure to climate-related
risks and opportunities and recognizes the data and methodological challenges associated with calculating such emissions
The Task Force encourages organizations to refer to the GHG Protocol's The Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and

Reporting Standard for guidance on reporting these emissions.
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Table C1 continued
Example Unit

Metric Category of Measure Example Metrics

 

Capital Deployment
Amount of capital
expenditure, financing,
or investment deployed
toward climate-related
risks and opportunities

Reporting currency + Percentage of annual revenue invested in R&D
of low-carbon products/services

+ Investment in climate adaptation measures
{e.8., soil health, irrigation, technology)

 

Internal Carbon Prices Price in reporting + Internal carbon price
Price on each ton of GHG currency, per MT
emissions used internally of CO,e

by an organization

+ Shadow carbon price, by geography

 

Remuneration Percentage, weighting, + Portion of employee’s annual discretionary bonus
Proportion of executive description, or linked to investments in climate-related products
Done linked DOS DNDINE ONE + Weighting of climate goals on long-term incentive
FEMME Inke currency scorecards for Executive Directors

to climate

+ Weighting of performance against operational
emissions’ targets for remuneration scorecard

considerations**

Note: While some organizations already disclose metrics consistent with these categories, the Task Force recognizes

others — especially those in the early stages of disclosing climate-related financial information — may need time to adjust
internal processes before disclosing such information.% In addition, some of the metric categories may be less applicable to
certain organizations. For example, data and methodologies for certain metrics for asset owners (e.g., impact of climate change
on investment income) are in early stages of development. In such cases, the Task Force recognizes organizations will need time
before such metrics are disclosed to their stakeholders.

On the application of materiality, the Task Force believes all organizations should disclose absolute Scope 1 and Scope 2 GHG
emissions independent of a materiality assessment. The disclosure of Scope 3 GHG emissions is subject to materiality; however,
the Task Force encourages organizations to disclose such emissions. The other cross-industry, climate-related metric categories
remain subject to materiality. Organizations should determine materiality for climate-related metrics consistent with howthey
determine the materiality of other information included in their financial filings.

*Transition and Physical Risks: Due to challenges related to portfolio aggregation and sourcing data from companies or
third-party fund managers, financial organizations may find it more difficult to quantify exposure to climate-related risks.
The Task Force suggests that financial organizations provide qualitative and quantitative information, when available.

*#Remuneration: While the Task Force encourages quantitative disclosure, organizations may include descriptive
language on remuneration policies and practices, such as how climate change issues are included in balanced scorecards
for executive remuneration.

Additional context, including alignment with existing standards and example disclosures, is provided in Appendix 2: Example Disclosures.

The first category, GHG emissions, is foundational As part of the consultation on metrics, targets,
data on which other climate-related disclosures and transition plans, the Task Force asked users
are often based. The next three categories, whether the proposed cross-industry metric
transition risks, physical risks, and climate-related categories would be useful, whether preparers
opportunities, relate to point-in-time disclosure currently made such disclosures, and any

of climate-related risks and opportunities. remaining challenges to implementation.5f A
The next, capital deployment, covers future summary of the results related to cross-industry,
capital expenditure, financing, or investment climate-related metric categories is provided in
to address these risks and opportunities, while Box C4 (p. 18). Full results are discussed in the
the last two categories, internal carbon prices TCFD's Proposed Guidance on Metrics, Targets,
and remuneration, relate to management's and Transition Plans Consultation: Summary
incorporation of climate considerations. of Responses, October 14, 2021.

35 Organizations may need time to evaluate and determine which metrics are relevant to disclose, identify and collect data and
other information needed for the calculation of metrics, implement new or update existing processes to address or include
relevant metrics, etc. The Task Force recognizes the amount oftime needed to disclose certain metrics (e.g., physical risks)
consistent with the categories identified in Table C1 (p.16) depends on various factors and encourages organizations
to workwith industry associations, standard setters, and others to agree on relevant and consistent metrics

36 The consultation questions referred to these “metric categories” as “metrics.”
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Box C4

Survey Results from the Consultation on Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans

The results showed that many preparers are currently disclosing or planning to disclose the metric
categories, particularly GHG emissions, and that users would find such disclosures useful.

 

  

 

Scope 1 and 2 Scope 3 Carbon Physical

Price Risks
E Currently disclose

m Planningto estimate,
but not necessarily disclose

Er

  

Currently estimate, but do not disclose
Bi No plans to estimate or disclose

Transition Climate-Related  Remuneration Capital
Risks Opportunities Deployment

B Planning to disclose
lm not sure

  

 

Scope 1 and 2 Scope 3 Carbon Physical
Price Risks
M Very useful 1 Somewhat useful m Notatall or not very useful

Transition Climate-Related  Remuneration Capital
Risks Opportunities Deployment

Source: TCFD, Proposed Guidance on Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans Consultation: Summary of Responses, October 14, 2021

{1} GHG Emissions: Absolute Scope 1, Scope 2,
and Scope 3; emissions intensity

Disclosure of GHG emissions is crucial for users
to understand an organization’s exposure to
climate-related risks and opportunities and

is also foundational information from which
other climate-related information is estimated.
Disclosure of absolute GHG emissions across

an organization's value chain provides insight
into how a given organization may be affected
by policy, regulatory, market, and technology
responses to limit climate change, while associated

GHG emissions intensity information can provide
a useful comparison across organizations.

Organizations with higher GHG emissions or
with fewer options with which to reduce GHG
emissions may be more impacted by transition
risk. In addition, current or future constraints
on GHG emissions, either set by policymakers
or by the organizations themselves, may impact
an organization's strategy or financial planning.
GHG emissions are also key inputs to estimating
other metrics, determining financial impact, and
performing scenario analysis.
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Recommended disclosure Metrics and Targets b)
calls for organizations to disclose “Scope 1,
Scope 2, and, if appropriate, Scope 3 greenhouse
gas (GHG) emissions” and specifies in the
guidance that such disclosures should be made
in line with the GHG Protocol methodology

to allow for aggregation across organizations
and jurisdictions.?7?#

Since 2017, there have been two major
developments impacting the reporting of GHG
emissions, including by broadening the range of
organizations for which Scope 3 GHG emissions
are appropriate.

* Anincreasing number of organizations are
reporting Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3 GHG
emissions, suggesting that organizations are
gaining experience with such reporting.®

* There has been significant work to advance
the understanding and calculation of GHG
emissions for financial organizations,
allowing financial preparers to disclose
their own Scope 3 GHG emissions in a more
comparable and complete manner.

The Task Force believes all organizations
should disclose absolute Scope 1 and Scope 2
GHG emissions independent of a materiality
assessment given the foundational aspect

of these emissions in assessing exposure to
climate-related issues. In addition, the Task
Force strongly encourages all organizations to
disclose Scope 3 GHG emissions.#:# The Task
Force believes that disclosure of GHG emissions
is critical to understanding an organization's
exposure to climate-related risks and

opportunities and hopes that encouraging more
disclosure of GHG emissions will help support
and accelerate improvements in methodology
and coverage of disclosure.

The Task Force recognizes several challenges
associated with disclosure of Scope 3 GHG
emissions, including data availability, calculation
methodologies, scoping, and organizational
barriers (Appendix 1: Further Information

on Select Cross-Industry, Climate-Related
Metric Categories provides further details).

In addition, there are inherent limitations of

the methodology for Scope 3 GHG emissions
accounting and reporting, including the issue

of double counting emissions.* The most well-
known and widely referenced Scope 3 reporting
methodology is the GHG Protocol's Corporate
Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting
Standard, commonly referred to as the Scope

3 Standard, which notes that “companies shall
publicly report [a] list of scope 3 categories and
activities included in the inventory. A list of scope
3 categories or activities excluded fromthe
inventory with justification of their exclusion.“3

Nonetheless, disclosure of Scope 3 GHG emissions
is an essential component of climate-related risk
analysis in commercial and financial markets
and is increasingly being requested by investors
and other market participants. In particular,
better disclosure of GHG emissions is necessary
to inform lending, investing, and insurance
underwriting decisions. Recognizing their
importance, a growing number of organizations
are working to improve how they calculate and
disclose their Scope 3 GHG emissions.#

As with all TCFD recommendations, organizations
should take account of their regional or national

37 While challenges remain, the GHG Protocol methodology is the most widely recognized and used international standard
for calculating GHG emissions. Organizations may use national reporting methodologies fthey are consistent with the

GHG Protocol methodology.

38 |n collaboration with the World Resources Institute and WBCSD, the GHG Protocol established a Land Sector and

 

Removals Initiative to develop new guidance on GHG accounting related to carbon removals and land use. The guidance
will build on the GHG Protocol Standards to cover the following activities: land use, land use change, carbon removals and
storage, bicenergy and other biogenic products, and related topics. The guidance is expected for publication in Q4 2022

33 Eighty-one percent ofrespondents in the Task Forces consultation on metrics, targets, and transition plans said they
currently disclose Scope 1 and Scope 2 GHG emissions, with another 54% disclosing Scope 3 GHG emissions. Task
Force analysis of 2,500 organizations within the MSCI A Country World Index (ACWI Index) found that from 2017-2019,
organizations disclosing Scope 1 GHG emissions grew from 43% to 52%; organizations disclosing Scope 2 GHG emissions
grew from 42% to 51%; and organizations disclosing Scope 3 GHG emissions grew from 28% to 34%

# When considering whether to disclose Scope 3 GHG emissions, organizations should consider whether such emissions
are à significant portion oftheir total GHG emissions. For example, see discussion 0f40% threshold in SBTI's paper
SBTÏ Criteria and Recommendations, Version 4.2, April 2021, Section V, p. 10

4 CDP, Transparency to Transformation: A Chain Reaction, February 2021, p. 14.

# GHG Protocol, Corporate Value Chain {Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard, September 2011, p. 6, notes “Use of
this standard is intended to enable comparisons of a company's GHG emissions over time. Itis not designed to support
comparisons between companies based on their Scope 3 GHG emissions. Differences in reported emissions may be a
result of differences in inventory methodology or differences in company size or structure."

4 GHG Protocol, Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard, September 2011, p. 119

#4 WWF, Overcoming Barriers for Corporate Scope 3 Action in the Supply Chain, November 2019; Blanco, Caro, and Corbett,
The State of Supply Chain Carbon Footprinting: Analysis of CDP Disclosures by US Firms, May 17, 2016; BHP Addressing
greenhouse gas emissions beyond our operations: Understanding the ‘scope 3'footprint of our value chain, August 2018
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

disclosure requirements when disclosing Scope
3 GHG emissions. For instance, the United
Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority proposes
in its consultation on “Enhancing climate-related
disclosures by asset managers, life insurers, and
FCA-regulated pension providers"that “firms
should disclose Scope 3 GHG emissions from

no later than 30 June 2024. This is 1 year later
than the deadline for the first disclosures in
accordance with the rest of our proposals.“$

Organizations may find it useful to disclose
GHG emissions by relevant business line, GHG

Figure C2

Example Disclosure: Barclays

Our clients’ activity

emissions split out by the seven gases covered
by the Kyoto Protocol, and emissions intensity.
Disclosing cumulative GHG emissions over
time relative to the baseline year used for

an organization’s GHG emissions reduction
target can also help users better understand
an organization's exposure to climate-related
issues and the potential need to make stronger
GHG emissions reductions in later years if
earlier interim targets are not met.‘ Figure C2
shows one bank's approach to disclosing
forward-looking estimates of its absolute

and intensity-based financed emissions.

 

Financed emissions — Ener.
Absolute emissions MtCO, {Indexed 2020 = 100)

      

Fuel mix Energy
#

100 1
Sar— 21
80 eux —
—…—
=
0 -15% by 2025 un
= pri
December 2020: ess
75.0 MtCO: .…—s
40
20 D Coël
BH oi
el
BG:
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040
Barclays Dec 2020 _ 2020 Benchmark OECD
—— EASDS Benchmark OECD* = = = Portfolio target path

 

Financed emissions - Power
Emissions intensity KgCO,/MWh

     
 

-30%by2025

Fuel mix-Power
%

200 33 29
December 2020:

150 321KgCO,/MWh

100 5 Coal
oil

50 Gas

0 30 D Nuclear
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 M Renewabie
fine. Hyaro)
—— EA SDS Benchmark OECD* = = = Portfolio target path Barclays Dec 2020 _ 2020 Benchmark OECD

Source: Barclays PLC, ESG Report 2020, p. 16
Note: Some content was reformatted in order to fitthe page

# As noted in the 2077 report, “The Task Force's recommendations were developed to apply broadly across sectors and jurisdictions
and should not be seen as superseding national disclosure requirements. Importantly, organizations should make financial
disclosures in accordance with their national disclosure requirements. Ifcertain elements ofthe recommendations are incompatible
with national disclosure requirements for financial filings, the Task Force encourages organizations to disclose those elements in
other official company reports that are issued at least annually, widely distributed and available to investors and others, and subject
to internal governance processes that are the same or substantially similar to those used for financial reporting” (p.17)

#6 Financial Conduct Authority, “Enhancing climate-related disclosures by asset managers, life insurers, and FCA-regulated pension

providers: Consultation paper,” June 2021, p. 32

#7 The GHG Protocol Corporate Standard “covers the accounting and reporting of seven greenhouse gases covered by the Kyoto
Protocol - carbon dioxide (CO,), methane (CH,), nitrous oxide (N,O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCS), perfluorocarbons (PCFS), sulphur
hexafluoride ($F;) and nitrogen trifluoride (NF3)" For more information, see https:f/ghgprotocol.org/corporate-standard

#8 Carbon budget, or cumulative emissions, refers to “the estimated cumulative amount of global carbon dioxide emissions that is
estimated to limit global surface temperature to à given level above à reference period, taking into account global surface temperature
contributions of other GHGs and dimate forcers” (original emphasis). IPCC, “Special Report: Global warming of 1.5°C Glossary.”

20
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

(2) Transition Risks: Amount and Extent
of Assets or Business Activities Vulnerable
to Transition Risks

As described in the 2017 report, organizations
can be vulnerable to several types of climate-
related transition risks: a) policy and legal risks
reflecting changes in policy and litigation action;
b) technology risk as emerging technologies
impact the competitiveness of certain
organizations; c) market risk from changes

to supply and demand; and d) reputational
risks tied to changing customer or
community perceptions.

Disclosure of the amount and extent of an
organization's assets or business activities
vulnerable to climate-related transition risks
allows users to better understand potential
financial vulnerability regarding issues such

as possible impairment or stranding of assets,
effects on the value of assets and liabilities, and
changes in demand for products or services.

The way in which organizations disclose this
metric category will depend on their industry-
and organization-specific climate-related risks.
For example, banks may look at the proportion
of their lending activities or portfolios materially
exposed to carbon-related assets, while
non-financial companies may choose to report
amount or percentage of operating earnings,
revenues, or production output coming from
high-carbon business lines. Figure C3 shows a

Figure C3

metals and mining company's disclosure of its
production output from high-carbon business
lines, which could be helpful in considering
concentrations of risks in assets affected by
the transition to a low-carbon economy.

{3} Physical Risks: Amount and Extent
of Assets or Business Activities Vulnerable
to Physical Risks5°

The 2017 report also describes the types of
climate-related physical risks that organizations
might be vulnerable to, distinguishing between
a) acute risks, such as hurricanes, floods, and
wildfires, that are event-driven and b) chronic
risks, such as higher temperatures and

sea-level rise, that refer to longer-term shifts

in climate patterns.5! In determining vulnerability
to physical risks, organizations should consider
their climate-related hazards, exposures to those
hazards, and their vulnerability.52

Disclosure of the amount or extent of an
organization's assets or business activities
vulnerable to material climate-related physical
risks allows users to better understand potential
financial vulnerability regarding such issues as
impairment or stranding of assets, effects on
the value of assets and liabilities, and cost of
business interruptions. Organizations that are
not yet able to disclose physical risk vulnerability
could begin by describing the types of tools they
are using to assess such risks.

Example Disclosure: BHP Production

In FY2020, we produced

   

 

 

Iron ore Metalurgieal Nickel Copper Natural gas | Crude oil Energy coal
coal

248 a 80 1,724 3860 49 23

million tonnes million tonnes | kilotonnes kilotonnes bcf MMboe million tonnes

Source: BHP, Climate Change Report 2020, p. 4

#TCFD, 2077 report, pp. 5-6

50 Consultation language included that organizations should disclose the proportion of assets “materially exposed" to recognize
that under forward-looking scenarios with high emissions pathways, all an organization’s physical assets could be exposed
to physical riskto some extent. However, several respondents noted that the use ofthe phrase “materially exposed”was
confusing given thatthe TCFD's Metrics and Targets recommendation is subject to materiality. Given thatthis materiality
threshold applies to the cross-industry metric categories, except for Scope 1 and Scope 2 GHG emissions, the Task Force
has removed ‘’materially exposed” from the transition risk and physical riskcategories

S'TCFD, 2077 report, p.6

5? Further guidance on reporting physical risks can be found in European Bank for Reconstruction and Development and Global
Centre of Excellence on Climate Adaptation's Advancing TCFD Guidance on Physical Climate Risks and Opportunities, May 2018,

and IPCC, Emergent Risks and Key Vulnerabilities, October 15, 2014

21
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Physical risks will be specific to the geography
where the assets or activities are located and
their likely exposure or vulnerability to the
risk. For example, certain assets may be most
vulnerable to acute risks from hurricanes

or wildfires, while others are more at risk from
chronic changes in average temperature,

Figure C4

Example Disclosure: lImarinen

Proportional shares of physical risk

Equity portfolio 2020

Corporate bond portfolio 2020

(e) 0.2

sea-level rise, or drought. Some disclosures focus
on the risk type by business activity or asset
category, such as the disclosure by the insurance
company in Figure C4, while other organizations
may choose to disclose their aggregate assets
based on a severity characterization, such as the
asset owner disclosure in Figure C5.

0.4 0.6 0.8

=

saWildfire mColdwave mHeatwave m\Water Stress mCoastal Flood mFlood mHurricane

Source: IImarinen, Annual and Sustainability Report 2020, p. 50
Note: Some content was reformatted in order to fitthe page

Figure C5

Example Disclosure: ERAFP

EXPOSURE TO PHYSICAL RISKS (% OF ASSETS)

Source — Trucost, 30 November 2020

20%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%

10%

 

 

 

  

10% 15%

 

+ The risk score is less
than or equal to 20
(low risk) for 83.2% of
the value of the global
aggregate portfolio.
This is higher than the
low-risk proportion of
the benchmark (81.6%).

 

 

+ The risk score is less
than or equal to 40
(high risk) for 1.0% of
the value of the global
aggregate portfolio. This
is lower than the high-
risk proportion of the

 

 

 

 

Low risk (0-20) Moderate risk (21-40)

High risk (41-100)

benchmark (1.5%).

 

 

 

® Global + Benchmark

aggregate portfolio

Source: ERAFP, Public Report 2020, p. 89

Note: Some content was reformatted in order to fit the page

index

22
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

(4) Climate-Related Opportunities: Proportion
of Revenue, Assets, or Other Business Activities
Aligned with Climate-Related Opportunities

The 2017 report also describes several
categories of climate-related opportunities that
organizations can capture. Examples include

a) improved resource efficiency from reducing
energy, water, and waste; b) use of energy
sources that emit low or no GHG emissions; c)
development of new products and services; d)
access to new markets; and e) improved adaptive
capacity and resilience.

Disclosure of the proportion of revenue, assets,
or business activities aligned with climate-
related opportunities provides insight into the
position of organizations relative to their peers
and allows users to understand likely transition
pathways and potential changes in revenue and
profitability over time.

The operationalization of this metric category will
be specific to each industry's or organization's
climate-related opportunities, as well as to the
opportunities within specific business lines or
asset classes. For example, auto manufacturers
might report sales of electric vehicles relative to
total vehicle sales, while utilities companies could

Figure C6

Example Disclosure: BASF

report renewable generation as a fraction of
their total electricity generation. An agricultural
company might report revenues received from
the sale of drought-resilient seeds, while an asset
manager could disclose the percent of resilient
infrastructure in its portfolio. The example
disclosure provided in Figure C6 shows how one
chemicals company characterizes its sales by
sustainability indicator.

Existing frameworks already provide some
sector-specific guidance to help preparers disclose
information on climate-related opportunities. For
example, SASB's Construction Materials Standard
(SASB EM-CM-410a.1) asks companies to report
the percentage of products that qualify for credits
in sustainable building design and construction
certifications; its Iron and Steel Producers
Standard (SASB EM-IS-000.A) refers to percent
raw steel production from basic oxygen furnace
processes and electric arc furnace processes.

In addition, the EU Technical Expert Group's
recommendations for the EU Taxonomy proposes
technical screening criteria for economic activities
that contributed substantially to climate change
mitigation, while the International Capital Market
Association (ICMA) provides voluntary guidance
for issuers of green bonds.

Classification of relevant portfolio? according to the Sustainable Solution Steering method

 

 

 

Substlantial suslainabilily Year Sales Million €
contribution in the —— Ace
value chain rs, 2020 ns 16,740
CS 4 2049 Rs 15,017
@ —————_—
&
: 2020 ns 30,519
Sustainable 3 |

Meets basic sustainability . 7 2019 ES 32,148

standards on the market Solution =

. >

Steering Z 207 mm
O
S 2019 C1 4,70!
À
SC a
@
AY 2020  , 72
istainability ns p 6

2019 1 64

  

being
actively addressed

Significant sustainability
concern identified and
action plan in development
or implementation

Source: BASF, BASF 2020 Report, p. 45

 

53 EU Technical Expert Group on Sustainable Finance, Technical Report, March 9, 2020; EU Technical Expert Group
on Sustainable Finance, Taxonomy Report: Technical Annex, March 9, 2020; ICMA, Green Bond Principles: Voluntary

Process Guidelines for Issuing Green Bonds, June 2021

23
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

{5) Capital Deployment: Amount of Capital
Expenditure, Financing, or Investment
Deployed toward Climate-Related Risks
and Opportunities

In addition to having different climate-related
risks and opportunities, organizations differ

in the extent to which they are deploying

capital to manage their risks and increase their
opportunities. Capital investment disclosure

by non-financial organizations and financing by
financial organizations gives an indication of the
extent to which long-term enterprise value might
be affected.

Deployment of capital in low-carbon

technologies, business lines, or products may
demonstrate that an organization is investing
to make their businesses resilient to transition

Figure C7

risk or to capture climate-related opportunities.
For example, organizations that are hardening
infrastructure in response to increased incidence
of physical risks can signal that short-term debt
might increase as the organizations upgrade their
assets but long-term costs may be lower.

Capital expenditures, capital investments, or

the amount of financing for new technologies,
infrastructure, or products can be reported in line
with financial reporting standards and commonly
used taxonomies for delineating climate-related
risks and opportunities. It can be helpful for
organizations to present traditional disclosures
alongside climate-related disclosures to allow
users to understand the scale of investment in
different types of activities, such as the example
provided by one insurance company in Figure C7.

Example Disclosure: Liberty Mutual

Total investments in
traditional energy'(US$)

2019 $3,841 million

2018 $4,522 million

Total investments in alternative
energy sources (US$})?4

2019 $420 million

2018 $295 million

’Includes unfunded commitments of US$67 million (2020), US$119 million (2019) and US$521 million (2018).
?In 2020, Liberty Mutual modified its definition of alternative/renewable energy to only include energy derived from solar, wind and hydro sources.

32020 Includes LP, LLC and other equity method investments value of US$288 million, fixed maturities of US$180 million and unfunded commitments of US$393
million. 2019 includes LP, LLC and other equity method investments value of U5$254 million, fixed maturities of US$22 million and unfunded commitments of US$144
million. 2018 includes LP, LLC and other equity method investments value of U5$226 million, fixed maturities of US$6 million and unfunded commitments of US$63
million. 2019 and 2018 figures have also been restated to reflect this new definition of alternative/renewable energy.

* The increase in 2020 was primarily driven by: (1) investments in solar asset-backed securities and (2) a combination of solar and hydro investments in LP, LLC and

other equity method investments.

Source: Liberty Mutual, 2020 Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures Report, p. 14

24
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

(6) Internal Carbon Prices: Price on Each
Ton of GHG Emissions Used Internally
by an Organization

Internal carbon pricing is a mechanism by which
organizations can put a value on their GHG
emissions to facilitate analysis of the actual

and potential impacts of climate-related risks
and opportunities. For example, non-financial
organizations may use an internal carbon

price to understand the potential future costs
associated with developing new carbon-related
assets. Financial organizations may use internal
carbon prices to inform their decision-making;
for example, by considering the impact of a given
carbon price on an organization's profitability
as part of the investing, lending, or insurance
underwriting process.5*

Internal carbon prices also provide users with

an understanding of the reasonableness of an
organization's risk and opportunity assessment
and strategy resilience.® The disclosure of internal
carbon prices can help users identify which
organizations have business models that are
vulnerable to future policy responses to climate
change and which are adapting their business
models to ensure resilience to transition risks.

While internal carbon prices can take a variety
of forms and amounts, an increasing number

of companies are setting an internal notional

or actual price on the amount of CO, emitted
from assets and investment projects so they can
see how, where, and when their GHG emissions
could affect their strategy, profit-and-loss (P&L)
statements, and investment choices.55

There is no definitive source on what an
organization's carbon price should be, and there
are a variety of ways that the cost of carbon

can be integrated into business practices.
Appendix 1.2. Internal Carbon Prices provides
additional considerations and resources to help
organizations set an internal carbon price.

The Task Force acknowledges that internal carbon
prices may not be relevant to all organizations,
such as those without material physical or
transition risks or those already subject to
external carbon prices. Disclosure of how
internal carbon prices relate to prices used in
external sources, such as those used in publicly
available scenarios, can help to provide further
transparency into the alignment of internal
prices with carbon prices that are consistent with
various public climate scenarios. For example,
the energy company shown in Figure C8 (p. 26)
provides its internal planning assumptions along
with prices from two IEA scenarios.57

{7} Remuneration: Proportion of Executive
Management Remuneration Linked
to Climate Considerations

Remuneration policies are important incentives for
achieving an organization's goals and objectives
and may provide insight on an organization's
governance, oversight, and accountability for
managing climate-related issues. The ways in
which organizations link executive compensation
to performance on issues related to climate change
will be specific to their company and governance
structure. Some organizations choose to reportthe
percentage of the executive’s pay linked to climate
considerations, while others discuss weighting
factors or total amount of compensation that could
be impacted. For example, one bank's disclosure
notes the percentage weighting given to climate
consideration within the scorecards of its executive
and managing directors (Figure C9, p. 26).

Several respondents to the public consultation
noted that remuneration might be best

reported with qualitative language. While the
Task Force encourages quantitative disclosure,
organizations may include descriptive language
on remuneration policies and practices, such

as how climate change issues are included in
balanced scorecards for executive remuneration.

54 Several organizations offer additional information on the use of carbon pricing within financial organizations, including
Mikolajezjk, et. al, /nternal Carbon Pricing and Climate Finance Tracking for Banks, September 2017, and Carbon Pricing
Unlocked Partnership, /nternal Carbon Pricing for Low-Carbon Finance, July 2019

55 For example, the CDP report Putting a Price on Carbon notes, "Despite 1,830 companies disclosing that they currently face
or expect carbon pricing regulation, 60% (over 1,100) ofthese companies did not identify this regulation as a substantive
riskto their stakeholders in their CDP disclosure —highlighting à potential gap in information that investors should explore”

{April 2021, p. 5)

56 CDP, Putting À Price on Carbon: The state of internal carbon pricing by corporates globally, April 2021; The Conference Board,
Internal Carbon Pricing: À Key Element of Climate Strategy, January 2021; Carbon Pricing Unlocked, internal Carbon Pricing for
Low-Carbon Finance, July 2019; Vale University, /nternal Carbon Pricing: Policy Framework and Case Studies; Aldy and Gianfrate,

Future-Proof Your Climate Strategy, May-June 2019

57 For instance, depending on the baseline scenario, there are different carbon prices that are consistent with a 2°C pathway,
For more information, see Riahi, et al., The shared socioeconomic pathways and their energy, land use, and greenhouse gas
emissions implications: an overview, July 2017, pp. 153-168, and CDP, Carbon Pricing Corridors, May 2077.

25
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Figure C8

Example Disclosure: Aker BP

USD (2020)
per tonne CO;

250
HE Aker BP Planning Assumptions

200 M #a-sos
M «Aa-srers

150

: | |
0 | E .

2025 2040

un
Oo

Source: Aker BP, Sustainability Report 2020, p. 25

Figure C9

Example Disclosure: HSBC

Metrics and targets

Disclose the metrics used - We use several metrics to measure and track our progress against key targets, and we will
by the organisation to assess be refining our approach to financed emissions (scope 3), including carbon intensity, for
climate-related risk and specific portfolios.

opportunities in line with
its strategy and risk
management process

- We set a new sustainable finance and investment target of $750bn to $1tn by 2030, after
reaching $93.0bn of our $100bn by 2025 target. The $40.Gbn achieved in 2020 counts
towards both the existing 2025 target and the new target.

Describe the targets used - We continue to disclose our wholesale loan exposure to the six high transition risk sectors, and
by the organisation to manage use our corporate customer transition risk questionnaire to help inform our risk management.
climate-related risks and
opportunities and performance
against targets

- We include an environment measure in the scorecards of our executive Directors and Group
Managing Directors. The long-term incentive scorecards of our executive Directors (three-year
performance period to the end of December 2023) have a 25% weighting for targets aligned
to our climate ambitions.

Disclose scope 1, scope 2 - We continue to disclose business travel, energy-related emissions and renewable energy use,
and, if appropriate, scope 3 and aim to disclose further details on our own scope 3 emissions in future reporting.
greenhouse gas emissions

and the related risks I Read more on our climate metrics and targets on pages 25 to 26, and our ESG review

pages 45 to 50 within our Annual Report and Accounts 2020.

Source: HSBC, TCFD Update 2020, p. 4
Note: Some content was reformatted in order to fitthe page

26
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

 

4. PORTFOLIO ALIGNMENT METRICS
FOR THE FINANCIAL SECTOR

 

A few organizations within the financial sector
have begun to disclose forward-looking
climate-related metrics, including metrics on
the alignment of their business activities with a
temperature pathway well below 2°C (“portfolio
alignment”).58 In October 2020, an independent
group of expert analysts from the financial
sector, the Portfolio Alignment Team (PAT),
released a report assessing the strengths and
trade-offs of the options available to measure
portfolio alignment and on methodologies for
implementing implied temperature rise (ITR)
metrics for those institutions wishing to do 50.6?

The Task Force conducted a public consultation
from October 29, 2020-january 28, 2021, to
gather feedback on developments, usefulness,
and challenges of forward-looking metrics for the
financial sector.f! Responses to the consultation
suggested that some organizations are disclosing
forward-looking metrics, with more planning

to do so, but that many were looking for more
clarity on methodologies and standardization.?

Considering the findings of the consultation

on forward-looking metrics, the Task Force
requested that the PAT develop a technical
report outlining their views on implementing
portfolio and financial activity alignment metrics
and identifying areas of further work. This
sub-section provides a summary of the team's
report, Measuring Portfolio Alignment: Technical
Considerations (PAT technical report), as a
resource for financial organizations interested in
understanding different portfolio alignment tools
or approaches.f?

The purpose of the PAT technical report is to
identify emerging thinking in portfolio alignment
tool construction and use to promote more
widespread adoption of consistent, robust, and
decision-useful approaches. Attaining some
degree of common practice related to portfolio
alignment is important to facilitate comparability
and transparency within and across financial
organizations and to provide further clarity to
non-financial preparers on how their transition
plans may impact their interactions with
investors and lenders.

58 Article two ofthe 2015 Paris Agreement commits parties to “holding the increasing in the global average temperature to well
below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels."

5 The PAT was established by Mark Carney in his capacity as UN Special Envoy for Climate and Finance and is led by David Blood
of Generation Investment Management. The team comprises participants from the following institutions: Bank of America, BBVA,
Blackrock Investment Management, Generation Investment Management, Goldman Sachs, HSBC, McKinsey & Company, and

the COP26 Private Finance Hub

5° Portfolio Alignment Team, Measuring Portfolio Alignment: Assessing the Position of Companies and Portfolios on the Path to Net Zero,

October 2020

STCFD, Forward-Looking Financial Sector Metrics Consultation, October 29, 2020

& TCFD, Forward-Looking Financial Sector Metrics Consultation: Summary of Responses, March 2021

& Portfolio Alignment Team, Measuring Portfolio Alignment: Technical Considerations, October 2021

27
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

The PAT technical report focuses on measuring
the extent to which portfolios are aligned with a
net-zero GHG emissions reduction ambition that
would limit average temperature rise to 1.5°C by
2050. It notes that to achieve the goals of the Paris
Agreement, financial organizations would have
to decrease the total GHG emissions financed

by their lending and investment portfolios to
within a defined amount or budget. The budget
allocated to individual financial portfolios
depends on the composition of that portfolio, as
different sectors and geographies will need to
decarbonize at different rates. Portfolio alignment
tools can inform portfolio-level target-setting
frameworks and help financial organizations
measure and manage toward the achievement
of climate-related targets, given their unique
portfolio composition. Portfolio alignment tools
also allow investors, lenders, and insurance
underwriters to evaluate organizations based on
information included in their transition plans as
well as demonstrated progress on reducing GHG
emissions. This allows financial organizations

to achieve their own GHG emissions reduction
targets and facilitate GHG emissions reductions
in the real economy through engagement rather
than through divestment.

Financial organizations can measure portfolio
alignment using a variety of methods (Figure C10).
Some may choose to assess a binary
categorization of the number of organizations
with and without GHG emissions reduction
targets. Others may choose to use benchmark
divergence models or ITR models, which
measure organizational alignment against
industry- and geography-level benchmarks

Figure C10

and translate the alignment or misalignment
of each organization to à temperature score.
Each type has benefits and drawbacks, as well
as important end uses; financial organizations
should use the tool that best suits their
individual context and capabilities.

The PAT technical report finds that, building

on the more established and commonly used
benchmark-divergence models, ITR tools

allow financial organizations to translate the
degree of alignment or misalignment of a

given organization with à benchmark into
consequences for a desired climate goal. This
may be important information for some financial
organizations as they manage their portfolios

to become aligned with the goals ofthe Paris
Agreement. However, the PAT technical report
also notes that ITR tools currently face challenges
including complexity and opaqueness regarding
key assumptions, variation in approach, and
limited data and scenario fidelity and availability,
which may limit widespread adoption.

The PAT technical report outlines several
considerations organized around nine key design
judgments that financial organizations interested
in measuring portfolio alignment should consider
in order to drive convergence and improve
fidelity of portfolio alignment approaches.
Finally, the PAT technical report details some

of the data and implementation challenges with
portfolio alignment tools in order to support
implementation by financial organizations
considering these tools and highlights areas

of future work to support implementation.

Types of Portfolio Alignment Tools

Example Types of Portfolio Alignment Tools

 

Binary Target
Measurement

* Percent ofinvestments
or counterparties with
declared net-zero targets

* Primary issue: incentivizes
target setting, but does
not provide temperature
alignment assessment

Benchmark Divergence
Models

+ Measures forward-looking
performance against
normative benchmarks

+ Primary issue: poorly
constructed methods
can lead to additional
unintended consequences

Implied Temperature
Rise Models (ITR)

- Translates degree of
alignment into impact
in the form of a
temperature score

+ Primary issue: complex and
opaque regarding influence
of key assumptions

28
  
 
  

 

D]
Climate-Related
Targets
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

D. Climate-Related Targets

This section provides an overview of the types of
information the Task Force believes are useful to
include in disclosures of climate-related targets as
well as examples of quantified targets that align
with the cross-industry, climate-related metric
categories. Additionally, it outlines the importance
of disclosing progress against climate-related
targets and provides an example template for
making such disclosures on GHG targets.

A climate-related target refers to a specific level,
threshold, quantity, or qualitative goal that the
organization wishes to meet over a defined time
horizon in order to address its climate-related
risks and opportunities. An organization's
climate-related targets should inform, and be
informed by, its strategy and risk management
and be linked to its climate-related metrics.$*
Some organizations select climate-related
metrics and then define climate-related targets
that allow them to operationalize their high-level
climate strategy. Others set targets and then
select climate-related metrics to measure and
track progress related to their targets.‘

À common target organizations set is around
their commitments to reduce GHG emissions.
Targets related to GHG emissions reductions
may vary between organizations and may be

determined in part, or in whole, by regulatory
or industry requirements. These targets should
specify which emissions scopes are included.
For instance, some organizations, such as those
in high-emitting sectors, may choose to focus
their reductions on Scope 1 and Scope 2 GHG
emissions; others, such as financial organizations
or auto manufacturers, may focus on reducing
Scope 3 GHG emissions. In addition to efforts to
meet emissions reduction targets, organizations
can articulate how they aim to reduce their non-
emissions risks and increase their opportunities
in a low-carbon world.

Several initiatives emphasize the importance of
setting GHG emissions reduction targets and
provide more guidance on publicly reporting
progress toward these commitments. For
example, the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
launched the Race to Zero campaign, a global
effort to aggregate net-zero commitments from

a range of leading networks andinitiatives across
the real economy. Race to Zero Partners include
more than 20 networks and initiatives, including
Business Ambition for 1.5°C, Fashion Charter

for Climate Action, Paris Aligned Investment
Initiative, and Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net
Zero (GFANZ) member initiatives.

 

54 While this guidance uses the term “target” throughout, it is important to note that organizations may use a variety ofterms such

as aim," “goal,” or “objective” to refer to the same concept.

55 Note that while all targets typically have à metric associated with them, not all metrics correspond to a target

56 As of August 30, 2021, the UNECCC Race to Zero covers nearly 25% of global CO, emissions and over 50% of GDP and includes initiatives
representing 733 cities, 31 regions, 120 countries, 3,067 businesses, 173 of the largest investors, and 622 Higher Education Institutions,

For more information, see “Race to Zero Campaign.”

30
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

 

1. CHARACTERISTICS OF EFFECTIVE
CLIMATE-RELATED TARGETS

 

Disclosure of climate-related targets should
include several characteristics in order to ensure
the targets are “specific and complete” in line
with the Task Forces fundamental principles for
effective disclosure.f7

Aligned with Strategy and Risk Management
Goals. Climate-related targets should be

Box D1

designed in consideration of an organization's
strategy and risk management processes,
informed by scenario analysis and climate science
{Box D}, and supported by appropriate metrics.
Organizations should set targets atthe level
(e.8., aggregate, sector, portfolio) that best suits
their business activities and strategy. As part of
their disclosures, organizations should consider
providing a description of how climate scenario
analysis influenced the determination of targets
and broader strategy and risk management goals.

Role of Scenario Analysis in Setting Achievable Climate-Related Targets

“The two main types of scenarios are {1} exploratory
scenarios used to explore à range of different
possible futures and (2) normative scenarios

used to plan for à preferred future. For normative
scenarios, scenario analysis starts with à preferred
or desired future outcome and then back-casts
plausible pathways from the preferred future to
the present in order to inform decisions on what is
needed to achieve that preferred future. Examples
of normative climate-related scenarios are those
targeting net-zero emissions in 2050. Normative
scenarios are typically used for assessment and
setting of specific targets and implementation
plans, rather than assessment of climate-related
risks and uncertainties.

Exploratory scenarios describe à diverse set of
plausible future states. These scenarios are then
used to assess potential climate-related risks and
uncertainties and test the resiliency of various
strategies to a wide range of future conditions.

Some companies use both approaches —the
exploratory approach when testing their strategies
for resilience, and the normative approach for
setting specific targets such as net-zero emission.”

Exploratory versus Normative Scenarios

Exploratory Scenarios

Different pathways leading
to different plausible futures

Normative Scenarios

Preferred

Future

 

RTE]

Reaching a targeted future by back-casting
to understand the pathway

Source: TCFD, 2020 TCFD Guidance on Scenario Analysis for Non-Financial Companies, pp. 15-16

67 TCFD, 2077 report, pp. 51-53
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Linked to Relevant Metrics. Climate-related
targets should be linked to defined metrics in
order to measure and track progress against
targets and assist with periodic reviews to
determine whether updates to the targets

may be necessary (Figure D1). For example,

if an organization sets a target to reducethe
proportion of asset value exposed to acute
flooding risk by 50% by 2050, it should define
metrics related to the physical risk of acute
flooding in order to monitor progress againstthe
target. Such metrics might be the proportion of
assets located within a designated flood zone
without flood-protection measures, the amount
of capital deployed to harden assets or restore

Figure D1

natural flood protection, or other appropriate
metrics related to the firm's exposure to acute
flood risks.

Quantified and Measurable. Climate-related
targets should be quantified and measurable,
where possible, especially for processes that are
fully in the organization's control, such as the
amount of investment in reducing vulnerability
to transition or physical risks.

In its 2021 annex, the Task Force recommends
that organizations disclose climate-related
targets related to the seven cross-industry,
climate-related metric categories, where relevant
(recommended disclosure Metrics and Targets c).

Example Relationship between Metrics and Targets

The figure below shows the relationship between GHG emissions and targets for a hypothetical firm.
Theillustrative GHG emissions pathways were adapted from Network for Greening the Financial System

{NGFS) scenario data.

Target: Our firm commits to reducing net Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions — as defined by the GHG Protocol — to zero
by 2050, with an interim target to cut Scope 1 and 2 GHG emissions by 50% relative to a 2015 baseline by 2030.

We are working with suppliers to reduce Scope 3 GHG emissions.

Current Metrics

Historical Metrics

 

Forward-Looking Information

-100%

 

 

Historical data
— — Company target GHG emissions path

— GG emissions under current
policies scenario

— GG emissions under delayed 2°C scenario
— GG emissions under immediate 2°C scenario
— GG emissions under 1.5°C scenario

Note: GHG emissions pathways were adapted from NGFS scenario data. |lustrative GHG emissions pathways for immediate and
delayed 2°C scenarios and 1.5°C scenarios are aligned with economy-wide GHG emissions reductions for Kyoto gases under the
REMIND limited Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR) scenarios. The illustrative current policies scenario extends the short-term trend

32
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

In support of such disclosure, Table D1 provides
examples of quantified targets that align with
the cross-industry, climate-related metric
categories.f8 The Task Force recognizes thatthe
ability of organizations to set, track, and disclose
climate-related targets aligned to the metric
categories may vary across jurisdictions, sectors,

Table D1

and business models. Accordingly, the Task Force
acknowledges that not all illustrative targets will
be relevant or applicable for all organizations,
and that other targets may be more applicable.
The Task Force encourages organizations to
reference existing target-setting frameworks

for sector-specific guidance.f°

Examples of Quantified Targets

Cross-Industry Metric Category

GHG Emissions
Absolute Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3;
emissions intensity

Example Climate-Related Target

* Reduce net Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3 GHG
emissions to zero by 2050, with an interim target
to cut emissions by 70% relative to à 2015 baseline
by 2035

 

Transition Risks
Amount and extent of assets or business activities
vulnerable to transition risks

+ Reduce percentage of asset value exposed
to transition risks by 30% by 2030, relative
to a 2019 baseline

 

Physical Risks
Amount and extent of assets or business activities
vulnerable to physical risks

* Reduce percentage of asset value exposed to acute
and chronic physical climate-related risks by 50%
by 2050

+ Ensure at least 60% of flood-exposed assets
have risk mitigation in place in line with the 2060
projected 100-year floodplain

 

Climate-Related Opportunities
Proportion of revenue, assets, or other business
activities aligned with climate-related opportunities

* Increase net installed renewable capacity so that
it comprises 85% of total capacity by 2035

 

Capital Deployment

Amount of capital expenditure, financing, or
investment deployed toward climate-related risks
and opportunities

+ Invest at least 25% of annual capital expenditure

into electric vehicle manufacturing

* Lend at least 10% of portfolio to projects focused

primarily on physical climate-related risk mitigation

 

Internal Carbon Prices
Price on each ton of GHG emissions used internally
by an organization

+ Increase internal carbon price to $150 by 2030

to reflect potential changes in policy

 

Remuneration
Proportion of executive management remuneration
linked to climate considerations

* Increase amount of executive management

remuneration impacted by climate considerations
to 10% by 2025

The example quantified targets shown in Table D1 are for illustrative purposes only

3 Respondents to the Task Force's consultation on metrics, targets, and transition plans cited various dimate-
related target-setting and disclosure frameworks. Commeonly referenced frameworks included the London Stock
Exchange Group's Target Setting Framework (described in this section), UN-Convened Net-Zero Asset Owner Alliance
Inaugural 2025 Target Setting Protocol, CA100+, Net Zero Company Benchmark, Paris Aligned Investment Initiative
{PAID), Met-Zero Investment Framework: Implementation Guide, and SBTi's Financial Sector Science-Based Targets

Guidance.

33
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Clearly Specified over Time.” Climate-related
targets should be defined clearly over time
and specify the following:

Baseline: Clear definition of baseline time
period against which progress will be tracked,
with a consistent base year across GHG
emissions targets;/!

Time horizon: Defined time horizon by
which targets are intended to be achieved.

Figure D2

Short-, medium-, and long-term time horizons
should be consistent across an organization's
targets and, if feasible, consistent with

key dates tracked by key international
organizations, such as the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), or regulators
{Figure D2} and

Interim targets: An interim target is a
checkpoint between the current period and
the target end date in which an organization

Disclosing Business-Relevant Time Horizons

As stated in the 2017 report, “[Blecause the timing of climate-related impacts on organizations will vary, the
Task Force believes specifying time frames across sectors for short, medium, and long term could hinder
organizations’ consideration of climate-related risks and opportunities specific to their businesses. The Task
Force is, therefore, not defining time frames and encourages preparers to decide how to define their own
time frames according to the life of their assets, the profile ofthe climate-related risks they face, and the

sectors and geographies in which they operate.”??

The TCFD 2020 Scenario Guidance provides the following diagram for the types of financial implications
across various time horizons to assist organizations in thinking about time horizons. Organizations should
think about their climate-related targets in the same manner.

Financial Implications
Broad conceptualization
of possible financial
pathways

Financial Implications
Broad estimates of relative
shifts in capital expenditures
due to climate change

Financial Implications
Projections/estimates of potential
returns on specific planned responses

to climate-related risks and opportunities

Financial Implications

Estimates/actual climate change impacts
on current revenues and costs, budgets
& value of assets and liabilities

>10 Years

    
    
  
 

Strategic Thinking
Informed by Scenarios

Strategic Planning Informed by
Scenarios Capital Planning

Project Planning, Financial Analyses
of Strategic Projects & Initiatives
Formulating Financial Strategy

0-2 Years

Formulating Operating Plans & Budgets

RTL

Source: TCFD, 2020 TCFD Guidance on Scenario Analysis for Non-Financial Companies, Figure E2, p. 49

This information is adapted from SBTi's Criteria and Recommendations for Financial Institutions and SBTs Science-Based Target Setting
Manual, Version 4.1, In its target-setting manual, SBTI recommends that ”[cJompanies should set à target that covers a minimum of5
years and a maximum of 15 years from the date the target is submitted for approval. It is also recommended to set long-term targets

beyond this interval and set interim milestones at five-year intervals” (p. 30)

The 2020 Science-Based Target Setting Manual recommends that for GHG emissions targets, organizations ‘use the same base year and
target year for all targets within the mid-term timeframe and all targets within the long-term timeframe,” maintaining that “a common
target period will simplify data tracking and communication around the target. Where value chain data are difficult to obtain, however,
it is acceptable if scope 1 and 2 targets use à different base year from scope 3 targets” (p.30)

72 TCFD, 2077 report, p.38

34
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

assesses its progress and makes any
adjustments to its plans and targets. Any
medium- and long-term targets should have
interim targets set at appropriate intervals
(e.g., 5-10 years) covering the full medium-
or long-term target time horizon.

Organizations may find it useful to disclose
medium-term or long-term targets for 2030

and 2050, which have become key target dates
following the publication of the IPCC's Special
Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C. This report
noted that in order to limit global warming to
1.5°C “global net human-caused emissions of
carbon dioxide (CO.) would need to fall by about
45 percent from 2010 levels by 2030, reaching
‘net zero’ around 2050."

Understandable and Contextualized. Climate-
related targets should be presented in a manner
that aids understanding (e.g., clear language,
labeling) and includes descriptions of any
limitations and cautions. Disclosures of targets
should be supported by contextual, narrative
information on items such as organizational
boundaries, methodologies, and underlying data
and assumptions, including those around the use
of offsets.

Periodically Reviewed and Updated.
Organizations should have a clear process

for reviewing climate-related targets, at least
every five years, and updating if necessary.
Because targets can become outdated, a process
to periodically refresh and update them is
necessary to ensure continued relevancy and
efficacy to a company's overall strategy planning
process. Considerations when determining
whether or not to adjust targets may include
changes to an organization's climate strategy

or goals as well as any developments related to
progress against targets (e.g., either outpacing
previously set targets or providing transparency
on underperformance).

Reported Annually. Organizations should
report on climate-related targets on at least an
annual basis, including any new targets as well
as progress against existing targets.

 

2. DISCLOSING CLIMATE-RELATED
TARGETS

 

Similar to the disclosure of climate-related
metrics, effective disclosure of climate-related
targets includes grounding disclosures in
narrative or qualitative information to help
users understand their context. Organizations
should describe the qualitative information
that encompasses climate-related targets

and reflects longer-term changes to an
organization's business or expected strategic
direction. Such qualitative information may
include describing what the management of
climate-related risks and pursuit of climate-
related opportunities might mean forthe
business and provide important context for
specific targets.

In addition to providing contextual
information about their climate-related
targets, organizations should also consider
disclosing in formats that would lead to better
standardization and comparability. As more
countries, non-financial companies, and
financial organizations set GHG emissions
reduction targets, including those aligned
with net-zero, it is particularly important for
disclosures of GHG emissions targets to be
comparable across organizations and over
time to allow users to assess the achievability
and credibility of organizations’ goals.
Respondents to the consultation on metrics,
targets, and transition plans emphasized that
standardization is key to driving effective,
decision-useful disclosure of climate-related
targets. Several recommended that preparers
use the template developed by FTSE Russell
to make such disclosures, which is included
here as an example of a type of template that
may be useful (Box D2, p. 36).

73 [PCC, “Summary for Policymakers of IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C approved by governments,” October 8, 2018

35
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Box D2
Case Study: Disclosure Template for GHG Emissions Reduction Targets

The following template was developed by FTSE Russell, part of the London Stock Exchange Group (LSEG),

to promote clear and concise disclosures on corporate GHG emissions reduction targets. The template

is “agnostic on the type, scope, or ambition level of the emissions reduction target and provides a standardized
format for companies to disclose information on their targets and the methodology”” The template — shown
here for a fictional target — was developed such that it could be completed for each of the organization's
targets, including interim targets, separately.

GHG emissions reduction target disclosure template
Target ID

Overall number of active 4 Include interim targets in the count.
GHG emissions targets:

Target number: 1 (of4)

Target type: Absolute (interim target) Indicate whether this is an interim target
{e.g. a short-term milestone between the
organisation's mid- or long-term target and
current period).

Date the target was set: 08/02/2019 Date that the target 14/01/2021
was last revised':

Target Information

Scope(s) covered Scope 1 & 2 {market-based) + 3 {cat 11: For scope 2 emissions, indicate if
use of sold product) calculations are location- or market-based.
For scope 3 emissions, indicate the GHG
protocol categories that are covered.

Percentage of in-scope 99%

emissions covered by the

target:

Base year: 2015 Base year 75 000 For intensity targets, provide activity

emissions:  tCO2e measure {e.g. tCO2e/Mwh or tCO2e/tonne
of cementitious product).

Target year: 2030 Target year 30 000

projected tCO2e
emissions:

Targeted reduction from 60%

base year (%)

Targeted reduction from 50% Current 60 000 Please indicate the most current year for

current year (%) emissions:  tCO2e which emissions data is available.

(2020)

Verified by an independent third party. Yes. SBTi Please indicate the name of the
independent third party that verified the
target.

Source that describes how the percentage ofin-  Sustainability Report Please indicate the title(s) of publicly

scope emissions covered by the target has 2020 {p.8, p.12) available documents and relevant page

been calculated. numbers where information can be found.

Source that describes transition plan outlining Roadmap to Net-zero Please indicate the title(s) of publicly

how this target will be met. 2050 ({p.1 -10) available documents and relevant page

numbers where information can be found.

For Scope 3 targets, source that describes the GHG Emissions
methodology used to calculate the Scope 3 Methodology (p.15-16)
emissions covered by the target.

Indicate the % of the target to be achieved 20% will be achieved

through offsets and provide a source that through CCS.

specifies their type and the offset provider. Roadmap to Net-zero
2050 {p. 8)

For intensity targets, source that describes the Sustainability Report

methodology used to calculate the carbon 2020 (p.89)

intensity.

Source: Kooroshy, etal., Towards investor-oriented carbon targets data, October 2021, p. 10

74 Kooroshy, et al., Towards investor-oriented carbon targets data, October 2021, p.9
36
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Finally, the Task Force encourages organizations
not to assume their climate-related targets
contain confidential business information that

would harm the organization if publicly disclosed.

When evaluating whether certain climate-
related targets contain confidential business
information, the organization should consider
the following:

+ whether the information provides the
organization with an economic benefit that
translates into a competitive advantage
because the information is unknown to its
competitors and

+ whether making such information public
may cause a considerable economic loss
for the organization.’*

If an organization determines that a particular
climate-related target is confidential, the
organization should provide relevant
information in broader terms to support
users’ decision-making.’5

75 European Innovation Council and SMEs Executive Agency (European Commission), Trade Secrets: Managing Confidential

Business Information, July 2021, pp. 2-4.

76 Based on footnote 10 from the European Commission Guidelines on nonfinancial reporting: Supplement on reporting

climate-related information

37
 

    

E.
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

E. Transition Plans

This section provides guidance on considerations
around the disclosure of transition plans,
including example disclosures. The Task Force
recognizes that an organization's transition plan
is one component ofits strategy to address its
climate-related risks and opportunities and
believes its recommendations implicitly cover the
key aspects of transition plans. However, given
the increasing focus on such plans, as described
below, the Task Force determined explicit
guidance may be useful. Another important
component of an organization's strategy to
address climate-related risks and opportunities
is its adaptation plan, which is beyond the scope
of this guidance./? Both transition and adaptation
plans may be components of an organization's
overall business strategy (Figure E1).

A transition plan is an aspect of an organization's
overall business strategy that lays out a set of
targets and actions supporting its transition
toward a low-carbon economy, including

actions such as reducing its GHG emissions.
Many organizations are making GHG emissions

Figure Eî

reduction commitments or are domiciled in
jurisdictions that have done so. In fact, a recent
study found that over 60% of countries and
nearly 10% of states and regions in the largest
emitting countries have committed to net-
zero.’® The study also found that of the 2,000
largest public companies, over 20% have net-
zero commitments, representing annual sales
of nearly $14 trillion./° These commitments
inherently, and in some cases explicitly, require
a plan; and many organizations are already
preparing such plans. From its consultation on
metrics, targets, and transition plans, the Task
Force found two-thirds of respondents had
either developed a transition plan or planned
to do so in the next year, with another 22%
reporting they planned to develop a transition
plan in the future.s°

Organizations’ transition plans are of particular
interest to users, especially when they are
seeking to verify the credibility of organizations’
commitments related to climate change. Users
are particularly interested in information on how

Relationship between Business Strategy,
Climate Strategy, and Transition Plan

Transition
Plan

Focus of this
CAai(e)s]

 

Overall business strategy

Climate strategy

Transition plan and adaptation plan

77 An adaptation plan lays out how an organization aims to minimize risks and capture opportunities associated with physical climate
changes. Though guidance on adaptation planning is not included in this document, the Task Force encourages other frameworks
and standard setters to consider developing guidance on designing and disclosing adaptation plans

78 The Energy & Climate Intelligence Unit and Oxford Net Zero, Taking Stock: A global assessment of net zero targets, March 2021

73 1bid

80 TCFD, Proposed Guidance on Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans Consultation: Summary of Responses, October 14,2021

39
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

organizations will adjust their strategies

or business models, including the specific
actions they will take to reduce risks and
increase opportunities as they transition

to a low-carbon economy. As part of the
consultation, 96% of users responded that
organizations’ disclosure of transition plans
would be “very useful” or “somewhat useful."#
As an example of users’ interest in transition
plans, Climate Action 100+(CA100+)— an
investor group focusing on the largest
corporate GHG emitters and their

progress in transitioning to a low-carbon
economy — recently began assessing those
companies’ transition plans through its Net Zero
Company Benchmark Indicators.ê2 83

A specific type of transition planning that has
gained attention recently focuses on achieving
a “net-zero“ target. Attention around net-zero
transition planning began primarily in response
to the IPCC's Special Report on Global Warming
of 1.5°C, which found that GHG emissions need
to decline by about 45% by 2030 and reach
net-zero around 2050 in order to achieve a 1.5°C
temperature target. The report also highlights
that the impact of 2°C of warming would be
significantly worse than 1.5°C and brought
renewed urgency to the effort to limit the global
temperature increase to 1.5°C. The IPCC report
shifted the language used by the public and
private sector on climate change from a focus
on limiting warming to 2°C to achieving net-zero
GHG emissions by 2050.

 

1. CHARACTERISTICS OF EFFECTIVE
TRANSITION PLANS

 

As part of determining key characteristics

of effective transition plans, the Task Force
reviewed publicly available materials published
by various groups focused on the transition

to a low-carbon economy, including Climate
Action 100+, Transition Pathway Initiative, the
UNFCCC Race to Zero (including SBTi and GFANZ),
the Institutional Investors Group on Climate
Change, and the Investor Agenda.f° Some of

the materials describe criteria the groups use

to assess an organization's transition to a low-
carbon economy while others provide guidance
or describe requirements for their members

on climate-related metrics and targets, which
are core aspects of transition plans. While the
materials may not provide explicit guidance

on developing a transition plan, they provide
information that organizations may find useful in
developing and disclosing information from their
transition plans. For example, Climate Action
100+'s Net Zero Company Benchmark Indicators
describes ten indicators and associated sub-
indicators it uses to assess an organization's
transition to a low-carbon economy, such

as sub-indicators on the proportion of GHG
emissions to include in GHG emissions reduction
commitments and the actions or elements of

a decarbonization strategy. The Task Force

drew from these materials to identify key
characteristics of effective transition plans that
are in line with its fundamental principles for
effective disclosure.f

Aligned with Strategy. À transition plan should
be a part of, and aligned with, an organization's
broader activities for addressing climate-related
risks and opportunities, which in turn should be
a part of, and aligned with, the organization's
overall business strategy.

8! TCFD, Proposed Guidance on Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans Consultation: Summary of Responses, October 14, 2021

82 Climate Action 100+, Net-Zero Company Benchmark, accessed April 30, 2021

#3 CA100+, “Blog: Climate Action 100+ Zeroes In On Industry-Wide Decarbonization,” August 2021

84 IPCC, Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C, October 2018

#5Several organizations offer resources that may be useful to organizations in developing transition plans, including,
Climate Action 100+, Climate Action 100+ Net-Zero Company Benchmark Indicators, March 2021; SBTIi, Science-Based Target
Setting Manual, Version 41, April 2020; SBTi, Foundations for Science-Based Net Zero Target Setting in the Corporate Sector,
Version 1.0, September 2020; SBTI, Financial Sector Science-Based Targets Guidance, Pilot Version 1.1, April 2021; and United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCCY}s Race to Zero Expert Peer Review Group, /nterpretation
Guide, Version 1.0, April 2021. TCFD Knowledge Hub provides additional resources

86 TCFD, 2077 report, pp. 51-53

40
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

Anchored in Quantitative Elements, Including
Climate-Related Metrics and Targets. À
transition plan should be designed to consider and
help achieve specific targets in an organization's
planned transition to a low-carbon economy.
Progress against the organization's targets should
be regularly tracked using appropriate metrics.
The transition plan should be consistent with
broader economy- or sector-wide science-based
pathways to a low-carbon economy.f”

Subject to Effective Governance Processes.

A transition plan should describe the approval
process and oversight and accountability
responsibilities within an organization, including
the role of the board and senior management

in overseeing the plan.

Actionable, Specific Initiatives. À transition
plan should articulate specific initiatives and
actions the organization will undertake to
effectively execute the transition plan, including
regular milestones. For example, the transition
plan may articulate how an organization plans
to reduce Scope 1 GHG emissions by investing
in new technologies and processes or by
encouraging suppliers to reduce GHG emissions
in their operations.

Credible. À transition plan should contain
sufficient information to enable users to
assessits credibility. For example, the plan
should describe the organization's current
capabilities, technologies, transition pathways,
and financial plan. Organizations may also want
to describe significant limitations, constraints,
and uncertainties in the transition plan, such as
challenges regarding GHG emissions reductions
of hard-to-decarbonize sectors.

and GHG emissions reduction opportunities,

 

Periodically Reviewed and Updated.
Atransition plan should be reviewed at least every
five years and updated if necessary. Organizations
should review their transition plans in line with
their review process for their climate-related
targets in order to ensure continued relevancy
and efficacy to an organization's overall strategy
planning process.

Reported Annually to Stakeholders.
Organizations should report publicly or to
stakeholders their initial transition plans and
significant updates to the plans. In addition,
organizations should report progress against
their transition plans annually and include a
comparison of completed actions to planned
actions in the prior reporting period.

 

2. TRANSITION PLAN CONSIDERATIONS

 

The transition plan elements described in this
sub-section are meant as high-level guidance to
support organizations as they develop transition
plans. The guidance is meant to be applicable

to a wide range of organizations and, therefore,
describes general elements that organizations
should consider as part of their transition
planning. These elements are shown in Table F1
(p. 42) and are grouped into the four categories
of the TCFD recommendations.

Importantly, an organization's transition plan
should reflect its individual circumstances,
including relevant industry-specific information.
The TCFD recognizes the transition to a low-
carbon economy will have industry-specific
nuances and encourages industry associations
and others to develop industry-specific guidance
on transition plans as needed.

#7 These pathways may be nonlinear depending on the specifics of an organization's industry

al
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Table E1

Transition Plan Elements

Governance

EN
Do
Ft
+
©
D
Fr]
LA)

HET
Management

MERE CS

 

Elements to Consider

 

+ Approval: The board or appropriate committee
ofthe board approves the transition plan and
climate-related targets.

Oversight: The board or appropriate committee of

the board oversees execution of the transition plan.

Accountability: Senior management has
responsibility for execution of the transition
plan, and the responsible parties have adequate
authority and access to resources to ensure
effective execution.

Incentives: Remuneration and other incentives
are aligned with the organization's dimate goals,
as described in the transition plan.

Reporting: The board or appropriate committee
ofthe board and senior management receive
regular status reports.

Review: The organization periodically reviews and
updates its plans, activities, metrics, and targets.

Transparency: The organization reports onits
transition planning goals and performance to
external stakeholders, including financial aspects,
performance against targets, and impacts on the
organization's business.

Assurance: The organization's reporting is subject
to independent review or third-party assurance.

 

Alignment with strategy: The organization aligns
its transition plan with its overall strategy; andthe
transition plan describes the following:

- Activities - how the organization will achieve
targets in defined time horizons

- Temperature goal - alisnment to a global
temperature goal (e.8., 1.5°C), relevant
regulatory mandates, and/or sectoral
decarbonization strategies

Plan assumptions: The transition plan describes
the organization's assumptions, particularly
around transition pathway uncertainties and
implementation challenges. The assumptions
should be consistent with those used by the
organization inits financial accounts, capital
expenditures, and investment decisions.

Prioritized opportunities: The transition plan
describes how the organization intends to maximize
its prioritized climate opportunities as the world
transitions to a low-carbon economy.

Action plans: The transition plan outlines short-
term and medium-term tactical and operational
plans and describes how related actions address
material sources of GHG emissions. The plan
includes current and planned initiatives to reduce
climate-related risks and increase climate-related
opportunities.

Financial plans: The transition plan describes the
supporting financial plans, budgets, and related
financial targets (e.g., amount of capital and other
expenditures supporting decarbonization strategy).

Scenario analysis: The organization tests
achievability of the transition plan and associated
targets using multiple climate-related scenarios.

 

Description of risks: The transition plan describes
the risks that the organization faces from a
transition to a low-carbon economy.

Plan challenges and uncertainties: The transition
plan describes the assumptions, uncertainties, and
challenges the organization faces in successfully
executing its transition plan.

 

Metrices: The transition plan describes metrics the
organization will monitor to track progress against
plans and targets, including related operational
and financial performance metrics, metrics aligned
with the cross-industry, climate-related metric
categories, and industry-specific or organization-
specific metrics.

Targets: The transition plan includes quantitative
and qualitative targets based on sound climate
science. For GHG emissions targets, the plan
indicates the type and scope of GHG emissions
included as well as the extent of GHG emissions
across territories, timeframes, or activities.

Methodology: Metrics and targets in a transition
plan are based on widely recognized and
transparent methodologies.

Dates:#% The transition plan specifies the dates
when targets are intended to be reached and
includes targets during the plan's time horizon
(e.8., a timetable for the plan's roadmap).

GHG emissions reductions: The transition plan
addresses the relative contribution of reductions,
removals, and offsets for achieving GHG
emissions targets.

88 Organizations may find it useful to disclose medium- or long-term targets for 2030 and 2050, which have become key
target dates following the IPCC's publication ofthe Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°€.

42
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

 

3. DISCLOSING TRANSITION
PLAN INFORMATION

 

The Task Force believes organizations that have
made GHG emissions reduction commitments,
operate in jurisdictions that have made such
commitments, or have agreed to meet investor
expectations regarding GHG emissions reductions
should describe their plans for transitioning to a
low-carbon economy. In addition, the Task Force
recognizes organizations' transition plans include
a wide range of information, all of which may not
be appropriate to include in financial filings or
other annual corporate reports. As such, the Task
Force encourages organizations to disclose key
information from their transition plans as part
of their disclosure of climate-related financial
information, including the following:

* current GHG emissions performance;

* impact on businesses, strategy, and financial
planning from a low-carbon transition; and

* actions and activities to support transition,
including GHG emissions reduction targets and
planned changes to businesses and strategy.

Figure E2

Example Disclosure: Nestlé

NESTLÉ'S NET FIX] ROADMAP

Our path to
Le UE
LRU
generations

Moving faster

Our milestones

When describing their GHG emissions reduction
targets, organization should include the target
dates as well as the scope and coverage.
Organizations should also consider describing
the assumptions, uncertainties, and key
methodologies associated with their transition
plans. In addition, organizations should report
on their progress in executing the plans on an
annual basis.

Provided here are two examples of how an
organization might disclose key information
from their transition plans. Figure E2 provides a
food and beverages company's description of its
initiatives to meet its net-zero commitment; and
Figure E3 (p. 44) provides an energy company's
description of its strategy for decarbonization of
its energy generation and operations.

Scaling up

Delivering our promise

By2050;wéwillreach

By 2025, we
will reduce our

emissions by 20%

Source: Nestlé, Nestlé’s Net Zero Roadmap, Feb 2021, p.4

LT AUS
LUNETTES
emissions by 50%

 

43
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Figure E3

Example Disclosure: Zrsted

Programme
overview

1 Decarbonisation of energy generation
and operations

 

Sustainability
challenge

Climate action and energy efficiency: As 73% of global carbon emissions come
from the use of fossiL fuel-based energy, decarbonising energy generation and improving
energy efficiency are essentual to Limit climate change.

 

Our approach

We increase our total share of green energy and work to reduce emissions to achleve carbon
neutrality in our energy generation and operations by 2025. This covers the emissions from
the generation of heat and power and from our operations and maintenance, including the
vessels servicing our wind farms, our vehicles, and our sites (scopes | and 2).

 

Our progress

+ We have reduced the carbon intensity of our energy generation and operations by 87%
since 2006, to 58 g CO,e/kWh in 2020. We are on track to deliver a 98% reduction by 2025.

+ The build-out of green energy is a key driver, and we have reached à 90% share of green
energy generation.

+ We continue to push for optimised vessel designs and the use of biofuels in our
vessel portfolio, including hybrid and battery technology, fuel cells, and offshore
charging possibilities.

+ As of 202/, we will no longer buy or Lease fossil-fuelled cars, and, by 2025, our entire fleet
of vehicles, including site and operational vehicles, will be fully electric. Currently, we
have a 38% share of electric vehicles, including plug-in hybrids) In our fleet.

+ We cover 100% of our own power consumption with green certificates, malnly from
our offshore wind farms.

+ We have initiated a project to identify options for offsetting any residual emissions
we may Still have by 2025 (scopes | and 2). These solutions must be certified and
able to document carbon removal.

 

Actions to
become future-fit

Achieve carbon neutrality in our energy generation and operations (scopes | and 2) by 2025.

 

Our governance

Accountability lies with the Executive Committee.

 

Policy and Link to
more information

+ Drsted Sustainability commitment
+ ESG performance report: Setion 2.7

 

 

 

 

International + Paris Agreement

frameworks + Greenhouse Gas Protocol & Science Based Targets initiative

of reference + IPCC Special Report: Global Warming of 1.5°C

Examples of + EVI00, the Climate Group

partnerships and + World WildLife Foundation DK

collaborations + Energy Transitions Commission

SDG contribution 13: We will become carbon-neutral to help Limit climate change.
Targets and GHG intensity Green energy share

indicators & CO,e/kWh) {)

 

-98 %
87%

90 99
58
=

2006 2019 2020 2025 2006 20/9 2020 2025
tai target

 

Source: Grsted, 2020 Sustainability Report, p. 32
Note: Some content was reformatted in order to fitthe page
44
   
  

u
Financial
Impacts

FU

 
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

F. Financial Impacts

This section provides additional guidance

for organizations aiming to assess and disclose
the financial impacts of climate-related risks
and opportunities.

To make informed financial decisions, investors,
lenders, and insurance underwriters need to
understand (1) the actual and potential impacts
of climate-related risks and opportunities on

an organization's financial performance and
financial position (Box F1} and (2) how those
impacts may affect the organization's enterprise
value over the longer term. The financial impacts
of climate-related issues on an organization

are driven by the specific climate-related risks
and opportunities to which the organization is
exposed, and its strategic and risk management
decisions on seizing those opportunities and
managing those risks (Figure F1, p. 47).

The Task Force’s recommendations cover a
range of disclosures that can inform users’
assessments of an organization's financial
performance and position over time. Better
disclosure of actual and potential financial
impacts associated with climate change is a key
goal of the Task Force’s work as such information
enables more effective pricing of climate-related
risks and opportunities and allocation of capital.

The Task Force recognizes that disclosingthe
potential financial impact of climate change
may not be consistent with financial filing
requirements and encourages organizations

to make financial disclosures in accordance
with such requirements. If certain elements of
the recommendations are incompatible with
disclosure requirements for financial filings, the
Task Force encourages organizations to disclose
those elements in other official reports that

are issued at least annually, widely distributed
and available to users, and subject to internal
governance processes that are the same or
substantially similar to those used for financial
reporting.® Whether an individual organization is
or may be affected financially by climate-related
issues usually depends on the following:

+ the organization's exposure to, and anticipated
effects of, specific climate-related risks and
opportunities;

#3 TCFD, 2077 report, p. 17.

Box F1
Actual and Potential Financial Impact

Actual impact refers to financial impact that has
already occurred as a result of climate-related risks
or opportunities.

Potential impact refers to financial impact that may
occur in the future due to climate-related risks or
opportunities.

Financial Performance and Position
Financial performance refers to an organization’s
income and expenses as reflected on its income and
cash flow statements (actual) or potential income
and expenses under different climate-related
scenarios.

Financial position refers to an organization's assets,
liabilities, and equity as reflected on its balance
sheet {actual} or potential assets, liabilities, and
equity under different climate-related scenarios.

the organization's planned responses to
manage (i.e. accept, avoid, pursue, reduce,
or share/transfer) its risks or seize
opportunities; and

the implications of the organization’s planned
responses on its income statement, cash flow
statement, and balance sheet.

Financial impact analyses should focus on:

+ the exposure and potential financial impact
if no action is taken and

* the financial implications of managing risks
and maximizing opportunities in the context
of an organization's overall business strategy
and environment.

Often organizations will use climate-related
scenario analysis as a central tool for
understanding potential financial impacts.

46
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Figure F1

Climate-Related Risks, Opportunities, and Financial Impact

Transition Risks
Policy and Legal

Physical Risks

     

CEE ne To AE TRI TA TA
Risk Management

Opportunities

EE TRS
A ET TES

RTS AT a Te E

TRE Re RIRE Tes

 
    
 

Expenditures

   
 

nee
Statement

Source: TCFD, 2017 report, pp. 8-9

The Task Force’s annual assessments ofthe
state of disclosures have shown some progress
in organizations disclosing potential financial
impacts, but that continues to be one of the
lowest areas of disclosure.® The 2021 status
report notes that “[dlisclosure of the resilience
of companies’ strategies under different climate-
related scenarios (Strategy c}, although still

the least reported recommended disclosure,
encouragingly increased from 5% of companies
in 2018 to 13% in 2020. .….[Nonetheless, the]
percentage of companies disclosing the resilience
of their strategies continues to be the lowest of
all recommended disclosures."°?' Further detail
on challenges to, and solutions for, estimating
climate-related financial impact is included in
Section C. Disclosure of Financial Impact in the
2021 status report.

In the 2021 status report, the Task Force
describes several challenges highlighted by
preparers around effectively assessing and
disclosing the financial impact of their climate-
related risks and opportunities. These include
challenges around organizational alignment,
data, risk evaluation, attribution of impacts in

Etre"
Statement

    
 

   
    

Assets & Liabilities
(ere AA TRE eat

Balance
SEC

financial accounts, longer climate horizons as
compared to business horizons, and securing
approval to publicly disclose the results.

More than 90% of users responding to the
consultation on metrics, targets, and transition
plans noted that information on the impact

of climate-related issues on an organization's
financial performance or position is useful for
decision-making.? Additionally, users interviewed
for the 2021 status report highlighted that they
are increasingly working to incorporate findings
from preparer disclosures on financial impacts
into their financial decision-making. Several
users reported conducting their own financial
impact analysis on organizations and comparing
the outcomes with those disclosed by the
organizations, frequently fostering constructive
dialogue between users and preparers.

The remainder of this section provides additional
guidance on how climate-related metrics and
targets, and information from transition plans,
can be used as inputs for estimating financial
impact as well as considerations for disclosing
financial performance and position.

50 TCFD, 2078 status report, p. 13; TCFD, 2019 status report, pp. iv and 51; and 2020 status report, pp. 4, 8, and 12

1 TCFD, 20217 status report, p. 31

% TCFD, Proposed Guidance on Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans Consultation: Summary

of Responses, October 14, 2021

47
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

 

1. INPUTS FOR ESTIMATING FINANCIAL
IMPACTS

 

Organizations’ disclosures of their climate-
related metrics — including ones consistent
with the cross-industry, climate-related metric
categories — and targets as well as information

or other business activities aligned with climate-
related opportunities can be applied to an
organization's existing outlook on future revenue
to estimate the contribution to overall revenue
from climate-related opportunities. Calculating
GHG emissions and carbon prices can informthe
organization's cost-benefit analysis of potential
investments, while scenario analysis on plausible

 

from their transition plans are key inputs for
estimating actual or potential financial impacts
associated with climate change.

Metrics. Figure F2 illustrates how metrics
consistent with the cross-industry, climate-
related metric categories inform estimation
of financial impact. For example, estimating
forward-looking proportion of revenue, assets,

Figure F2
Relationship between Cross-Industry Metric

Categories and Financial Impacts

Governance

EN
bo
og
ns
©
E
Fe]
n

— Example information flow between cross-industry metrie categories and financial impacts

Key Questions

Cross-Industry Metric Categories

future emissions pathways and implied carbon
prices can allow for a range of estimates on
forward-looking carbon costs.

Targets. Targets may also form an input into
financial impact assessments. Organizations can
analyze the potential financial implications of
targets on their overall business. For example,

Financial Impacts

 

Is the organization's
governance enabling
oversight, assessment,
and management of
climate-related risks
and opportunities?

 

 

Proportion of executive management
remuneration linked to climate
considerations

 

 

Is the organization
aligning its businesses,
strategy, and financial
planning in light of
climate-related risks
and opportunities?

Proportion of revenue, assets, or other
business activities aligned with cdimate-
related opportunities

 

Amount of capital expenditure, financing,
or investment deployed toward climate-
related risks and opportunities

 

 

cimate-related risks?

Absolute Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3
GHG emissions and emissions intensity

Impact of climate-related risks
or opportunities on financial
performance, e.g.:

* increases in revenue from
new products or services from
climate opportunities

+ increases in cost due to carbon
prices, business interruption,
contingency, or repairs

* changes to operating cash flow
from changes in upstream costs

+ impairment charges due to
assets exposed to transition risks

* changes to total expected losses
due to physical risks

 

 

 

 

"
5 Price on each ton of GHG emissions used
A internally by an organization

©

Æ Whatis the

ER ocreanizations Amount and extent of assets or business
3 exposure to activities vulnerable to physical risks

 

Amount and extent of assets or business
activities vulnerable to transition risks

 

 

 

 

3 Additional details on financial impact, including examples, are provided in the 2077 report,
pe. 8-11, and the 2027 annex, pp. 75-76

 

Impact of climate-related risks
or opportunities on financial
position, e.g.:

* changes to the carrying amount
of assets due to exposureto
physical and transition risks

* changes to the expected
portfolio value given climate-
related risks and opportunities

+ changesinliability and equity
due to increases or decreases
in assets

 

 

48
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

an auto manufacturer may want to set a target to
expandits electric vehicle sales to 50% of its total
sales by 2030. It could then leverage scenario
analysis to understand how various factors and
future pathways could impact different elements
of its financial performance or position assuming
such a target. Similarly, users may explore how

a specific organization's targets may impact its
financial performance and position. For example,
if an organization sets a target to upgrade 75%

of its transmission lines by 2030 to reduce
wildfire risk, then a user may be able to infer

that the organization's future cost of business
interruptions may decline.

Transition Plans. Finally, financial impact
assessments can also be informed by
information included in an organization's
transition plan. When an organization develops
a transition plan, it may estimate the potential
financial impact of planned actions and align its
financial plans accordingly. Similarly, users may
consider a specific organization's disclosure of
key information from transition plans as well as
the user's assessment of the plan's viability as a
key input into its estimation of that organization's
potential financial performance and position. À
description of planned initiatives as well as the
process for monitoring, assuring, and achieving
GHG emissions reductions targets can provide
useful inputs for assessing an organization's
potential financial impacts, such as expected
future revenue streams from renewable energy
or capital expenditures to upgrade assets with
lower-carbon alternatives.°{

 

2. DISCLOSING FINANCIAL IMPACTS

 

The Task Force views disclosures of financial
impact of climate-related risks and opportunities
as falling under two broad categories, as follows:

1) impact of climate-related risks or
opportunities on financial performance and

2} impact of climate-related risks or
opportunities on financial position.

The remainder of this sub-section provides
additional details on disclosing these two
categories, including example disclosures
of financial impact.

(1) Performance: Impact of Climate-Related
Risks or Opportunities on Financial Performance

Actual or potential changes to income and cash
flow statements or other appropriate financial
performance measures as a result of climate-
related risks and opportunities provide insight
into management priorities and strategic efforts.
Impact on financial performance can include the
following:

+ increases in revenue from new products or
services from climate opportunities;

* increases in cost due to carbon prices,
business interruption, contingency, or repairs;

* changes to operating cash flow from changes
in upstream costs;

+ _impairment charges due to assets exposed to
transition risks; and

* changes to total expected losses due to
physical risks.

Figure F3 (p. 50) shows an example disclosure

of actual financial impact, including proportion
of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation,
and amortization (EBITDA) aligned to low-carbon
products, services, and technologies. Figure F4
(p. 51) includes an example of potential impact
on financial performance — the long-term impact
of extreme rainfall.

#4 1OSCO, Report on Sustainability-Related Issuer Disclosures, June 21, 2021, pp. 22-24.

49
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Figure F3

Example Disclosure: Enel

Main climate change indicators

 

| 202] 2019 2020-2019

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Direct greenhouse gas emissions - Scope 1 1 {million/t,} 45.26 69.98 (24.72) -853%
indirect greenhouse gas emissions - Scope 2 - Purchase of

electricity from the grid {location based) {million/t,,} 1.43 155 (0.12) -77%
indirect greenhouse gas emissions - Scope 2 - Purchase of

electricity from the grid (market based) {million/t,,} 2.28 2.30 (002) -0.9%
indirect greenhouse gas emissions - Scope 2 - Distribution grid

losses {location based) {million/t,,} 356 3.82 (026) -6.8%
indirect greenhouse gas emissions - Scope 2 - Distribution grid

losses (market based) {million/t, } 557 600 (043) -72%
indirect greenhouse gas emissions - Scope 3 {milion/t,.) 4770 56.92 (9.22) -16.2%
- of which emissions connected with gas sales {milion/t,.) 21.48 23.92 (2.44) -10.2%
Specific direct greenhouse gas emissions - Scope 1 (gCO,../kWh} 214 298 (84) -28.2%
Specific emissions of SO, {g/kWh)} 0.10 058 (049) -83.1%
Specific emissions of NO, {g/kWh)} 0.36 060 {0.24} -40.0%
Specific emissions of particulates {g/kWh)} 001 0.12 (0.11) -917%
Zero-emission generation (% of total} 634 549 85 155%
Total direct fuel consumption {Mtoe] 28.9 30.1 (6.2) -206%
Average efficiency of thermal plants (1%) 44.2 420 2.2 5.2%
Water withdrawals in water-stressed areas (# KG] 229 254 (25) -9.8%
Specific water withdrawals for total generation {/KWh)} 020 033 (0.13) -394%
Reference price of CO, Æ) 24.72 248 (01) -03%
Ordinary EBITDA for low-carbon products, services and technologies {millions of €} 15,616 16,241 (6250) -3.8%
Capex for low-carbon products, services and technologies {millions of €} 9,575 9131 4440 49%
Ratio of capex for low-carbon products, services and technologies

to total te) 940 920 20 22%
4) Specific emissions are calculated considering total emissions from thermal generation as a ratio of total renewable, nuclear and thermal generation (including

the contribution of heat).
@

The calculation does not consider Italian O&G plants being decommissioned or of marginal impact In addition, the figures do not take account of consumption and

generation for cogeneration relating to Russian thermal generation plants. Average efficiency is calculated on the basis of the plant fleet and is weighted by generation.
6} The figure for 2019 has been recalculated on the basis of the change in scope of plants in water-stressed areas.
4} Specific withdrawals consist of all water withdrawals from sources on the surface including recovered rainwater}, underground, third-party, the sea and wastewater
{supplies from third parties} used for generation processes and for closed-cycle cooling, excluding sea water returned to the sea after the desalination process (brine}.

6)

by the generation companies have been reallocated to the End-user Markets Business Line.

Source: Enel, Integrated Annual Report 2020, p. 113

The comparative figure for 2019 has been adjusted to take account of the fact that in South America and Mexico the values relating to large customers managed

50
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Figure F4

Example Disclosure: Meridian Energy

Risk drivers Extreme rainfall in
hydro catchments

 

Negative demand disruption -
emissions intensive industries

 

 

 

 

 

Type Physical Transition

Scale Medium Medium

Likelihood About as likely as not About as likely as not
Timeframe Long-term (30 years) Long-term (30 years)

 

Increasing intensity of extreme rainfall events in

Impacts hydro catchments.

Sudden drop in electricity demand as emissions-
intensive industries are disrupted by ambitious
climate change legislation or shifting consumer
preferences for sustainable goods and services.

 

Financial implications

Increase in intensity of extreme rainfall events
may require the lowering of dam water levels
(reducing assets’ generating capacity) and/or the
strengthening of dam structures.

Reduced electricity demand may negatively impact
on Meridian's revenue, for example if the dairy
industry was curtailed due to climate action policy.

 

Quantification

-$11 million

-$12 to -$17 million

 

Estimated potential financial impact is an
annualised figure over a 30 year time horizon of
estimated civil construction costs and negative

Estimated potential financial impact is an
annualized figure over a 80 year time horizon,
calculated by modelling the impact of a step-

 

Methodology revenue impacts.

change reduction in demand and comparing
it to our Evolution scenario. There is significant
uncertainty to this calculation.

 

Probable Maximum Flood values are reviewed once  Meridian supports of climate action policy that

every ten years to incorporate climate change.

Management response

would increase electricity demand in other sectors,
in particular the use of electricity in the transport
and industrial heat sectors of the economy.

Source: Meridian Energy, Climate Change Disclosures Meridian Energy Limited FY20, p. 11

{2} Position: Impact of Climate-Related Risks
or Opportunities on Financial Position

Changes to the balance sheet statement as a
result of climate-related risks and opportunities
can include the following:

* changestothe carrying amount of assets due
to exposure to physical and transition risks;

changes to the expected portfolio value given
climate-related risks and opportunities; and

changes in liability and equity due to increases
or decreases in assets (e.g., due to low-carbon
capital investments or to sale or write-offs of
stranded assets).

Figure F5 (p. 52) shows an example disclosure
highlighting the potential impact of climate-related
risks and opportunities on an organization's
financial position in terms of fair value of assets
under the International Energy Agency's (IEASs)
Sustainable Development Scenario.

Figure F6 (p. 52) shows an example of a company
disclosing the potential impact of climate-related
risks and opportunities on financial position from
a change in valuation under a 1.5°C scenario
compared to a 3°C scenario.

51
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Figure F5

Example Disclosure: Eni

In particular, by adopting the IEA SDS scenario, which envisages the global application of a
strongly increasing cost for direct CO: emissions, the internal rate of return would decrease
by 1.3 percentage points assuming that the cost is not recoverable contractually and for tax
purposes. In order to verify the resilience of Ens asset portfolio, a sensitivity analysis was
also carried out on all CGUS (Cash Generating Units) in the upstream sector. The stress test,
performed under the IEA SDS scenario, showed that the overall book values of the assets were
stable with a reduction in fair value of around 11%, or around 5% in the event of contractual
and fiscal recoverability of the costs of direct CO, emissions. Analyses carried out on the 3P10
reserves of the current upstream portfolio confirmed their resilience and flexibility.

Resilience In terms of resilience, the average Brent break even price, meaning the price that guarantees a return
on investment equal to the cost of capital, is around 20 $/bl, with values ranging from around 10 $/bl
to 35 $/bl for the most costly reserve.

In terms of flexibility, adopting a sensitivity scenario with a constant Brent equal to 50 $/bl and a
constant gas price (PSV) equal to 5 $/mmbtu, the result is that 93% of the value and 81% of the
volumes of 3P reserves"! could be produced by 2035. This leaves broad freedom to plan exploration
and development campaigns to support future production and to adapt to sudden market changes
without incurring in the stranded assets risk.

 

Source: Eni, Eni for 2020: Carbon neutrality by 2050, 2020, p. 20

Figure F6
Example Disclosure: Invesco

 

Finding 1
Figure 13 M GIVZ Equity

 

Change in valuation relative to baseline D MSCI ACWI
for GIVZ Equity and the MSCI ACWI

Change in valuation relative
to baseline (in %) (INDCs)

-4.35
-4.40
-4.45

-4.50 +
1.5 °C

 

 

Source: Invesco, 2019 Invesco Climate Change Report, p. 31

Aggregate valuation impacts are negative in the 1.5 °C
and positive in the 4 °C scenario

Analysis of the 1.5 °C versus a 3 ©C baseline scenario reveals
that the GIVZ Equity portfolio is exposed to climate risk. Under
the 1.5 ©C scenario, this could reduce investment value by 4%.
This lines up with results for the MSCI ACWI.

52
Appendices

 

 
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Appendix 1: Further Information
on Select Cross-Industry, Climate-Related

Metric Categories

This appendix provides additional information
on select cross-industry, climate-related metric
categories. The first sub-section provides an
overview of the importance and challenges

of Scope 3 GHG emissions disclosure as well

as a summary of developments related to
Scope 3 GHG emissions reporting for financial
institutions. This sub-section focuses on

Scope 3 GHG emissions in order to highlight
developments on the research and disclosure
of these emissions since 2017. It is important
to emphasize that organizations should
disclose Scope 1 and Scope 2 GHG emissions
independent of a materiality assessment, given
their importance as an input to calculating
Scope 3 GHG emissions and as a critical aspect
of understanding climate-related risks and
opportunities. The second sub-section provides
information to support disclosure of internal
carbon prices.

 

1. SCOPE 3 GHG EMISSIONS

 

The most well-known and widely referenced
classification of greenhouse gases is the GHG
Protocol Corporate Standard, which defines
the three scopes of GHG emissions from

the perspective of the reporting company

as follows: 56

* Scope 1 GHG emissions are direct emissions
from owned or controlled sources. Note that
one company’s Scope 1 (direct) emissions are
Scope 3 (indirect) emissions for a company
or consumer who is in the first company's
value chain.

Scope 2 GHG emissions are indirect emissions
from the generation of purchased energy.

* Scope 3 GHG emissions are all indirect
emissions (not included in Scope 2) that occur
in the value chain of the reporting company,
including both upstream and downstream
emissions. The GHG Protocol's Scope 3
schema contains 15 stages, eight of which are
upstream, seven downstream.

The GHG Protocol Scope 3 Standard notes
that “while à company has control over its
direct emissions, it has influence over its
indirect emissions"?

35 The GHG Protocol Corporate Standard, commonly referred to simply as the Corporate Standard, is a methodology
developed by the GHG Protocol Initiative and is the methodology recommended by the Task Force for caleulating and
reporting GHG emissions (2017 TCFD Final Report, Section C3, p. 22, footnote 40). It covers the accounting and reporting
of the six greenhouse gases covered by the Kyoto Protocol — carbon dioxide (CO,), methane (CH), nitrous oxide (NO),
hydrofluorocarbons (HECS), perfluorocarbons (PECS), and sulphur hexafluoride (SF). The first edition of the Corporate
Standard was published in 2001 and then updated in 2004 with additional guidance clarifying how companies can measure
GHG emissions from electricity and other energy purchases, and account for GHG emissions from throughout their value
chains. Building on the Corporate Standard, the GHG Protocol then developed à more detailed approach to Scope 3 GHG
emissions, and in 2011 published the Corporate Value Chain {Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard, commenly referred
to as the Scope 3 Standard. À supplement to the Scope 3 Standard was published in 2013 providing additional details on
calculating Scope 3 GHG emissions, namely the Technical Guidance for Calculating Scope 3 Emissions

36 For more information, see GHG Protocol, Frequently Asked Questions

#7 GHG Protocol, Corporate Value Chain {Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard, September 2011, p. 27

54
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Since 2017, Scope 3 GHG emissions, including

the Scope 3 investment category, have received
increasing attention in both the public and private
sectors. Scope 3 GHG emissions are becoming

an essential component of climate-related risk
analysis in commercial and financial markets.

As companies’ and jurisdictions’ commitments

to reduce GHG emissions — both direct and
indirect — to net-zero continue to grow, investors,
lenders, and insurance underwriters want insight
into value chain GHG emissions and how they
could be affected by such commitments. In
response to widespread interest, an increasing
number of companies are reporting GHG
emissions, including Scope 3 GHG emissions.

A. Importance of Disclosure of Scope 3
GHG Emissions

Scope 3 GHG emissions are an important
component of overall GHG emissions for
several reasons.

Scope 3 GHG emissions are increasingly
understood as an important indicator of
risk, as risk is embedded in buying inputs or
selling products that are carbon intensive.

À 2017 study by CDP found that ofthe three
GHG emissions scopes, “approximately 40% of
global GHG emissions are driven or influenced
by organizations through their purchases (ie.
purchased goods and services) and through the
products they sell” (in other words, through their
Scope 3 GHG emissions).?®

Scope 3 GHG emissions are a critical
component of overall GHG emissions.

A growing body of research shows that in
certain sectors, Scope 3 GHG emissions can
account for several times the impact of a
company's Scope 1 and Scope 2 GHG emissions.

For example, a 2015 report by the sell-side
investment research house Kepler-Cheuvreux
analyzed the GHG emissions for 24 industry
groups under the Global Industry Classification
Standard (GICS) (Figure A1-1, p. 56). It found
that 21 industry groups had indirect GHG
emissions (Scope 3 GHG emissions upstream
and downstream and Scope 2 upstream

GHG emissions) greater than 50% of their
overall carbon emissions.® For eight of these

21 industries — Banks, Insurance, Real Estate,
Energy, Capital Goods, Automobiles and

Components, Consumer Durables and Apparel,
and Technology — downstream Scope 3 GHG
emissions were predominant. For 13 industries,
upstream GHG emissions were predominant.
Only three of the 24 industry groups had indirect
emissions less than 50%: Utilities, Transportation,
and Materials.

In addition, CDP's 2020 Supply Chain Report,
evaluating the state of environmental risks in
supply chains for 8,098 suppliers, found that
upstream Scope 3 GHG emissions are on average
11.4 times higher than operational emissions
across sectors (Figure A1-2, p. 56).

Anincreasing number of companies are
reporting Scope 3 GHG emissions. Task Force
analysis of 2,500 organizations within the MSCI
All Country World Index (ACWI Index) found that
from 2017-2019, organizations disclosing Scope 3
GHG emissions grew from 28% to 34%.19°

Industry and investor initiatives are calling
for the disclosure of Scope 3 GHG emissions.
For example, Climate Action 100+(CA100+), an
investor initiative of 615 investors representing
$55 trillion in assets under management,
engages with companies to “reduce greenhouse
gas emissions across the value chain” in line
with the Paris Agreement"?! Necessarily, this
engagement includes Scope 3 GHG emissions
within its focus. CA100+ also asks companies to
enhance their climate-related disclosures in line
with the TCFD recommendations.

There is increasing urgency on reducing GHG
emissions — both direct and indirect — to
zero, which stems from a shift in international
dialogue from a focus on carbon budgets
consistent with the Paris Agreement to a focus
on achieving net-zero GHG emissions by 2050,
with governments and investors increasingly
focusing on the full value chain of emissions.

As an increasing number of jurisdictions formally
move to net-zero targets, they may require more
comprehensive GHG reporting from companies
within their borders.

Financial organizations require effective
disclosure of GHG emissions data, including
Scope 3 GHG emissions, to track their GHG
emissions reduction commitments and meet
their disclosure obligations. Banks, insurance
companies, asset managers, and asset owners
will need better disclosure of GHG emissions

38 SBTI, Gold Standard, and Navigant, Value Change in the Value Chain: Best Practices in Scope 3 GHG Management,
citing CDP's 2017/2018 Global Supply Chain report Closing the Gap: Scaling Up Sustainable Supply Chains,

November 2018, p. 9

5% For more information, see Kepler Cheuvreux, Carbon Compass: /nvestor Guide to Carbon Footprinting

and the section titled “Fasten your seat belt, pp. 19-23
100 Task Force analysis of MSCI ACWI Index data
101 For more information, see Climate Action 100+

55
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Figure A1-1
Importance of Scope 3 GHG Emissions
in Certain Sectors

100
90
2 80
8 70
5 60
9 50
Ë 40
g 30
& 2
10
0
à
ÿ EE # LE À E & “# RS É FA EA & < Fa à S SE SE
Sr DORE S Ê  P SE ÿ SE # S S
a EE & &° ei ES Ê FO ra S S
& & $S FA SF ES
 S & PO gs © # Ê
a ESS
C3 € <
Ÿ Œ
m Scope 2 and 3 Upstream (supply chain) m Scope 1 2 Scope 3 downstream (Product Use)

Source: Kepler-Cheuvreux, Carbon Compass: Investor Guide to Carbon Footprinting, 360 Report, November 23, 2015

Figure A1-2

Upstream GHG Emissions by CDP Sector

Upstrearn emissions: scope 3 emissions are on average 11.4 times higher than operational emissions

Yy EI 28.3

 

ETREIC 25.2

Services 212

WA

Fashion Charter signatories recognize
that the biggest impact in terms of GHG
emissions lies in the supply chain. At
the same time, there is a recognition
that Scope 3 emissions in the supply
chain are a big challenge for the apparel
sector. We began working with CDP also
[VERTE 43 at the request of many signatories, to
demonstrate that existing and incoming
companies to the Charter are measuring
and ultimately managing emissions in
order to meet the goals they have set
through the Fashion Charter.

Lindita Xhaferi-Salihu, | \

Sectors Engagement Lead,
UN Climate Change

Food, beverage & agriculture

Biotech, health care & pharma

=
©

SN
NS

Manufacturing

LEE

LÉSATNE 4.0
En Transportation services 1.5

| | Power generation 1.1

Be + 1 + & D X © = @ ©

EH Fossil Fuels 0.7

N Average of final ratio (Scope 3 [supply chain emissions] : Scope 1
+2 [operational emissions and direct emissions])

Source: CDP Transparency to Transformation: À Chain Reaction, CDP Global Supply Chain Report 2020, February 2021, p. 14
Note: Some content was reformatted in order to fit the page 56
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

from preparers to understand GHG emissions
from their lending, investing, and insurance
underwriting activities and evaluate how these
activities may expose them to carbon-related
assets and their associated risks.

B. Challenges in Determining Scope 3
GHG Emissions

Despite increased demand and reporting,
the disclosure of Scope 3 GHG emissions faces
a number of challenges, including:

Data Challenges. Organizations struggle to
collect relevant and sufficiently granular primary
data and to manage the amount of data needed
to determine Scope 3 GHG emissions; this often
requires formal data management plans and
resources. Using secondary data or industry-
average GHG emissions factors also presents
issues, such as how to account for uncertainties
in industry-average GHG emissions factors
around data collection or quality and an uneven
distribution of GHG emissions within an industry.

In feedback to the Task Force’s consultation on
metrics, targets, and transition plans, several
financial sector respondents expressed concern
about reporting on GHG emissions related to
their own or their clients’ investments, given the
current data challenges and existing accounting
guidance on how to measure and report GHG
emissions associated with investments. In
particular, they voiced concerns aboutthe
accuracy and completeness of the reported data.

Methodology Challenges. Accurately capturing
Scope 3 GHG emissions also has methodological
challenges, including estimating GHG

emissions for suppliers that do not calculate
their own emissions, defining an appropriate
calculation approach for each Scope 3 category,
and recognizing double counting that may
occur when GHG emissions are aggregated
across multiple organizations. Even when

an appropriate methodology is determined,
users of an organization's disclosures must
understand sources of uncertainty regarding
whether a value accurately represents the
activity in the organization's value chain, whether
variation in calculated GHG emissions are due
to methodological choices, and whether there
are any limitations as a result of the modeling
approaches used to reflect the real world.

Boundary Challenges. Establishing clear value
chain boundaries when calculating Scope 3 GHG
emissions presents another challenge.!®? While
in principle the fifteen GHG emissions categories
defined by the Scope 3 Standard are designed
to be mutually exclusive, applying the Scope

3 Standard in practice can cause an overlap in
reporting boundaries due to an organization's
involvement at multiple points in the life cycle
of products and can result in double counting
of Scope 3 GHG emissions.

Organizational Challenges. The calculation

of Scope 3 GHG emissions requires personnel,
resources, expertise, and data management and
quality processes.

C. Scope 3 GHG Emissions for Financial
Organizations

Category 15 ofthe GHG Protocols Scope 3
Standard relates to investments, which the

GHG Protocol notes are a form of Scope 3

GHG emissions “applicable to investors and
companies that provide financial services.
Investments are categorized as a downstream
Scope 3 category because the provision of capital
or financing is a service provided by the reporting
company."%%1% For financial organizations, Scope
3 GHG emissions, especially category 15, are

by far the largest component of their total GHG
emissions! However, assessing and pricing
exposure to climate-related risks within the
financial system depends on the effectiveness

of the climate-related disclosures ofthe
companies that are financed by banks, asset
owners, and asset managers and underwritten
by insurance companies. Ifthe disclosures made
by organizations with significant direct and
indirect GHG emissions do not include sufficient
information on Scope 1, Scope 2, and Scope 3
GHG emissions, then the banking and insurance
industries’ understanding of the concentration
of carbon-related assets on their balance sheets
may be incomplete and asset owner and asset
managers will have limited visibility into risk
associated with carbon-intensive issuers.

Since the TCFD published its final report in June
2017, a number of initiatives have emerged to
improve the disclosure and reporting of financial
organizations’ GHG emissions. Two of these
developments are of particular relevance for
the Task Forces guidance on this topic: (1} the

1% The GHG Protocol Corporate Standard allows companies flexibility in choosing which, ifany, scope 3 activities to include
inthe GHG inventory when the company defines its operational boundaries,

1% GHG Protocol, Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard, September 2011, p. 51

14The GHG Protocol's Category 15: Investments was designed primarily for financial institutions and includes Scope 3 emissions
associated with the reporting company/’s investments, not already included in Scope 1 or Scope 2. For more information, see

GHG Protocol, Technical Guidance for Calculating Scope 3 Emissions, p. 136
1% For more information, see CDP, The Time to Green Finance, April 2021, p. 33

57
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials
(PCAF) and (2) the Climate Risk Officer (CRO)
Forum methodology on carbon footprinting
for the insurance industry.

The PCAF Global GHG Accounting and Reporting
Standard

In November 2020, PCAF issued the first edition
of the Global GHG Accounting and Reporting
Standard for the Financial Industry (the PCAF
Standard). The PCAF Standard builds on

the GHG Protocol Scope 3 accounting rules,
providing methodological guidance to assist

in the measurement and disclosure of GHG
emissions associated with six asset classes:

(1) listed equity and corporate bonds,

(2) business loans and unlisted equity,

(3) project finance, (4) commercial real estate,
(5) mortgages, and (6) motor vehicle loans.

The PCAF Standard provides guidance for

each asset class to aid calculation ofthe GHG
emissions resulting from activities in the real
economy that are financed through lending
and investment portfolios. GHG emissions are
attributed to financial organizations based on
accounting rules that are specific for each asset
class. This approach is used by the SBTi as part
of their guidance for financial organizations on
setting targets on their GHG emissions.

The PCAF Standard currently does not provide
explicit guidance on calculating GHG emissions
for certain financial products including private
equity that refers to investment funds, green
bonds, sovereign bonds, loans for securitization,
exchange traded funds, derivatives, and initial
public offering (IPO) underwriting and notes
“guidance on such financial products will be
considered and published in later editions of
the Standard.""®# In addition, PCAF is working

in collaboration with members of the Net-Zero
Insurance Alliance as well as other insurance
companies to develop a methodology for
measuring GHG emissions associated with
underwriting activities.'°°

PCAF recognizes the difficulties inherent in the
comparability, coverage, transparency, and
reliability of Scope 3 GHG emissions data, but
notes that “by requiring Scope 3 reporting for
selected sectors, PCAF seeks to make Scope 3 GHG
emissions reporting more common practice by
improving data availability and quality over time.”
To support Scope 3 GHG emissions data challenges,
the PCAF Standard provides recommendations
and requirements for disclosures, as well as
guidance on data quality scoring per asset class
to facilitate data transparency and quality in the
medium and long term.

The CRO Forum's Carbon Footprinting
Methodology for Underwriting Portfolios

In April 2020, the CRO Forum published Carbon
Footprinting Methodology for Underwriting
Portfolios, a report summarizing “a range of
options, methodologies, and barriers for the
carbon-footprinting of insurance companies’
underwriting portfolios” (p. 5).11017177172

The CRO report states that the weighted average
carbon intensity (WACI) metric for asset owners
and asset managers recommended by the TCFD
in its 2017 final report is also applicable — with
appropriate changes — to underwriting
portfolios. The CRO Forum's report recommends
using WACI as a first step in gauging the financial
risks posed to underwriting portfolios by climate
change. The CRO Forums WACI metrics are
calculated on the basis of the insured entities’
Scope 1 and Scope 2 GHG emissions only,

with the Scope 3 GHG emissions of entities
underwritten excluded from the calculation.

106 PCA, Global GHG Accounting and Reporting Standard for the Financial Industry, November 18, 2020

107 SBTi, Financial Sector Science-Based Targets Guidance, Pilot Version 1.1, April 2021
108 PCAF, Global GHG Accounting and Reporting Standard for the Financial Industry, November 18, 2020, p.44

108 PCAF, “Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials collaborates with UN-convened Net-Zero Insurance Alliance to develop

standard to measure insured emissions," September 6, 2021

10 For more information, see Carbon Footprinting Methodology for Underwriting Portfolios, April 29, 2020

"The CRO Forum is an initiative established in 2004 bringing together the Chief Risk Officers of leading insurance companies

to advance risk management practices in the insurance industry.

12 The Net-Zero Insurance Alliance (NZIA), convened by the UN Environment Programme’s Principles for Sustainable Insurance
Initiative (PSI) and contributing to the UNFCCC Race to Zero Campaign and the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ),
provides additional guidance and/or requirements for insurance and reinsurance signatory companies. For more information,

see the NZIA “Statement of commitment by signatory companies."

58
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

 

2. INTERNAL CARBON PRICES

 

This sub-section describes key considerations for
how organizations can use and disclose internal
carbon prices.

A. Using Internal Carbon Prices

Organizations can use carbon prices to

assess the financial implications of changes

to investment, production, and consumption
patterns, as well as potential technological
progress and future emissions abatement costs.

Organizations’ internal carbon prices can come
in several forms and be used for a range of
business applications!" There are two types

of internal carbon prices commonly used by
organizations. The first type is a shadow price,
which is a theoretical cost or notional amount
that the organization does not charge but

that can be used in assessing the economic
implications or trade-offs for such things as risk
impacts, new investments, net present value

of projects, and the cost-benefit of various
initiatives. The second type is an internal tax
or fee, which is a carbon price charged to a
business activity, product line, or other business
unit based on its GHG emissions (these internal
taxes or fees are similar to intracompany transfer
pricing). Internal revenues from these fees

or taxes are often used by an organization to
incentivize emissions mitigation and investment
in various low-carbon opportunities.

Common uses of internal carbon pricing include:

* Performance measurement - For example,
determining carbon-adjusted earnings per
share, estimating expected profitability,
incentivizing energy savine, identifying
revenue opportunities and risks, managing
procurement and supply chains'*

* Position management - For example,
valuation of assets

* Investment decisions - For example,
identifying low-carbon, high-return investment
opportunities, planning capital investments,
determining cost-benefit and net present value
of projects

+ Strategy - For example, assessing future
policy responses to climate change such as
the potential imposition of explicit or implicit
carbon pricing, effects on overall economic
growth and sector demand, and technology
cost-benefit hurdles

* Risk Management - For example, to measure,
model, and manage GHG emissions-related
transition risks and opportunities and adjust
strategy accordingly

To set an internal carbon price(s), an organization
should understand how it plans to use the
internal carbon price, the appropriate form

for different applications of internal carbon
pricing, and approaches to determining a price
level. Effective carbon prices typically have the
following characteristics:

* Prices or methodologies for prices should
be based on credible, reputable scientific
research on reasonable carbon prices in light
of societal climate goals." At a minimum,
organizations should consider a carbon price
that is aligned to a temperature pathway well
below 2°C.16

* An organization's internal carbon price(s)
should be consistent with prices implied by
the organization's climate-related targets
(e.g., net-zero by 2050, Paris-aligned).

* Internal carbon prices should increase over
time to reflect diminishing carbon budget.

Organizations should recalculate their
internal carbon prices, as warranted,

to account for climate policy or regulation,
or lack thereof, that may signal sharper price
increases that will be needed to maintain the
given carbon budget implied by the chosen
temperature pathway.

* Internal carbon prices may need to reflect
geographic or sectoral differences in
which the organization determines that such
differences will have a significant impact on
the carbon price level and a credible source
for differentiated pricing can be found.

13 For more information, see Center for Climate and Energy Solutions, The Business of Pricing Carbon: How Companies are

Pricing Carbon to Mitigate Risks and Prepare for a Low-Carbon Future.

14 Carbon Pricing Unlocked, /nternal Carbon Pricing for Future-Proof Supply Chains, January 2020

15 For more information, see CDP, We Mean Business, and Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition, “Carbon Pricing Corridors
The Market View," May 2017, “Carbon Pricing Corridors, 2018," July 2018, and Report ofthe High-Level Commission on Carbon

Prices, May 29, 2017

M6 Article two of the 2015 Paris Agreement commits parties to “holding the increasing in the global average temperature
to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above

pre-industrial levels.”

59
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Several sources provide more information

on setting internal carbon prices, including

(1) Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition's
Construction Industry Value Chaïn: How
Companies Are Using Carbon Pricing to Address
Climate Risk and Find New Opportunities,

(2) Carbon Pricing Unlocked Partnership's How-To
Guide to Corporate Internal Carbon Pricing,

(3) Carbon Pricing Unlocked Partnership's
Internal Carbon Pricing for Low-Carbon Finance,
(4) Yale University's /nternal Carbon Pricing: Policy
Framework and Case Studies, and (5) WBCSD's
Emerging Practices in Internal Carbon Pricing:

À Practical Guide.

B. Disclosure of Internal Carbon Prices

The Task Force encourages organizations for
which disclosure of internal carbon prices

is relevant to disclose the actual internal
carbon price(s) used within the organization,
for example, when making investment or
strategic planning decisions. Organizations
should disclose internal carbon prices that

are consistent with those used in determining
values of items disclosed publicly, such as asset
valuations and retirement obligations.

Organizations may also consider disclosing
information about how they use an internal
carbon price(s) in their decision-making and to
what extent it affects their decisions. To more fully
understand an organization’s risk management
and strategy decisions, many investors are

interested in why and how a firm uses internal
carbon pricing. According|y, organizations should
consider providing the following details related to
internal carbon price:

* methodology used to develop internal
carbon price(s);

+ whether the organization's internal carbon
price reflects a proxy of the all-in implicit cost
of various climate policies (e.g., performance
standards, renewable portfolio standards,
efficiency standards, etc.) or an explicit cost
of GHG emissions (e.g., market-based price,
cap-and-trade, carbon tax};

* type and proportion of the organization's
GHG emissions covered by carbon pricing
(e.g., Scope 1, Scope 2, Scope 3 GHG emissions;
which greenhouse gases);

*_assumptions about how the organization's
internal carbon price might change over time in
response to declining carbon budgets, changing
policy, and changing emissions projections;

+ the scope of implementation of internal carbon
prices (e.8., geographic, business lines);

* whether the carbon price would apply only
at the margin or as a base cost; and

whether the organization uses a common
carbon price or differentiated carbon prices.

17Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition, Construction Industry Value Chain: How Companies Are Using Carbon Pricing to Address
Climate Risk and Find New Opportunities, 2018; Carbon Pricing Unlocked, How-To Guide to Corporate Internal Carbon Pricing,
December 2017 Carbon Pricing Unlocked, internal Carbon Pricing for Low-Carbon Finance, July 2019; Vale University,
Internal Carbon Pricing: Policy Framework and Case Studies, February 2019; WBCSD, Emerging Practices in Internal Carbon

Pricing: À Practical Guide, December 4, 2015

60
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Appendix 2: Example Disclosures

Table A2-1 provides additional information on the cross-industry, climate-related metric categories and financial impacts, including non-exhaustive alignment
with other frameworks, example metrics, and example disclosures from financial and non-financial organizations.

Table A2-1

Information

Alignment (Non-Exhaustive)

Example Metrics

Financial Organization Examples

Non-Financial Organization Examples

 

Cross-Industry, Climate-Related Metric Categories

 

GHG Emissions

Absolute Scope 1,
Scope 2, and Scope 3;
emissions intensity

GRI: 102-29, 102-30, 305-1, 305-2, 305-3; CDP: C4.1a,
C5.1, C5.2, C6.1, C6.3, C6.5; CDSB: REQ-04, REQ-05;

SASB: various sector frameworks;

GRI: 102-29, 201-2, 305-4; CDP: C4.1, C6.1, C6.3, C6.5,
C6.10; PCAF: Global Standard Table 2-1;

SASB: SASB provides industry-specific guidance.
Metrics that fall under the SASB disclosure
topics “Greenhouse Gas Emissions" or “Energy
Management" align with GHG Emissions;

ECB Supervisory Expectation: 13.5;

European Commission Guidelines: Section 3.5

+ Absolute Scope 1, Scope 2, Scope 3 GHG emissions
+ Financed emissions by asset class

+ Weighted average carbon intensity

+ GHG emissions per MWh of electricity produced

* Gross global Scope 1 GHG emissions covered under
emissions-limiting regulations

Temasek:8 "We have committed to carbon
neutrality in our own operations by 2020 and
achieved this target by 31 March 2020 through the
purchase and retirement of carbon credits from
the voluntary carbon markets.”

CPP Investments:"" Disclosure notes 20.9 million
tonnes of CO,e in Long-Term Capital Ownership,
39.8 in Equity Ownership, and 37.7 in Government-
Issued Securities.

Dow: “Dow confirmed today it has entered

into new renewable power agreements for its
manufacturing facilities in Argentina, Brazil, Texas,
and Kentucky, securing 338 more megawatts

of power capacity from renewable sources,
representing an expected reduction of more than
225,000 metric tons of CO,e.”

EDF:"21 "(EDF group's current trajectory)
represents an absolute reduction of direct
greenhouse-gas emissions amounting to 25 Mt
CO, by 2030, equivalent to a carbon intensity
of approximately 35 g CO,/kWh in 2030."

 

Transition Risks

Amount and extent

of assets or business
activities vulnerable
to transition risks

CDP: C2.3a;

European Commission Guidelines: Annex 1.4;
European Commission Guidelines: Annex 1.5;
EBC Supervisory Expectation: 9.2, 13.5;

EBA Guidelines (EBA/GL/11/2017)

+ Volume of real estate collaterals highly exposed to
transition risk

+ Concentration of credit exposure to carbon-related
assets

+ Percent of revenue from coal mining

+ Percent of revenue passenger kilometers not
covered by Carbon Offsetting and Reduction
Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA)

ING:"2 “Outstanding- upstream oil and gas
<€4.0 billion.”

BBVA:"# "BBVA'S Transition Sensitive and Carbon-
Related wholesale exposures represent below
less than 20% of total wholesale EAD (exposure at
default}, or well below 10% of the Group's EAD."

United Airlines: “Approximately 33% of United’s
2019 capacity (including regional partners)

was flown between country-pairs that have
volunteered for the first phase ofthe Carbon
Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International
Aviation (CORSIA) (2021-23). If additional countries
join in subsequent years, this number is expected
to increase." (CDP 2020 Report)

 

Physical Risks

Amount and extent

of assets or business
activities vulnerable
to physical risks

SASB: 1F0402-13 (Real Estate Standard};

SASB: FN-MF-450a.1 (Mortgage Finance Standards);
European Commission Guidelines: Section 3.5;

ECB Supervisory Expectation: 1.1, 9.1;

EBA Guidelines (EBA/GL/2019/02)

+ Number and value of mortgage loans in 100-year
flood zones

+ Wastewater treatment capacity located in 100-year
flood zones

+ Revenue associated with water withdrawn and
consumed in regions of high or extremely high
baseline water stress

+ Proportion of property, infrastructure, or other
alternative asset portfolios in an area subject to
flooding, heat stress, or water stress

+ Proportion of real assets exposed to 1:100 or 1:200
climate-related hazards

HSBC:"#% [Describing pilot test of 97 most critical
properties and sites] “By 2050, 15 ofthe 97 most
critical properties will potentially face increased
risk from physical hazards under the most severe
Hot house climate change scenario of 3°C increase
in climate temperature.”

ConEdison:"#% "To assess future asset vulnerability
to sea level rise and storm surge, the Study team
analyzed the exposure of Con Edison’s assets to

3 feet of sea level rise. Ofthe 324 substations 75
would be vulnerable to flooding during a 100-year
storm if sea level rose 3 feet. In addition, 32 gas
regulators and five steam generation stations
would be exposed. Hardening all of these assets
would cost approximately $680 million.”

 

18 Temasek, “Focusing on Climate Change," Accessed May 6, 2021

19 CPP Investments, Report on Sustainable Investing 2020, November 2020

12 Dow, “Dow signs four renewable power agreements to achieve 2025 Goal and lead petrochemical industry," June 17, 2020

1 EDE “Corporate social responsibility: Carbon neutrality by 2050," Accessed May 6, 2021

12 ING, Terra progress report, November 16, 2020, p. 22

13 BBVA, BBVA Report on TCFD 2020, October 2020, p. 27

124 CDP, United Airlines Holdings Climate Change 2020 report, 2020, p. 8
15 HSBC, TCFD Update 2020, Feb 24, 2021, p. 20

16 ConEdison, “Climate Change Vulnerability Study,” December 2018, p. 5. Note: ConEdison utilizes data from its 2019 Climate Change Vulnerability Study to inform its 2020 Climate Change Resilience and Adaptation report

61
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Information

Alignment (Non-Exhaustive)

Example Metrics

Financial Organization Examples

Non-Financial Organization Examples

 

Climate-Related
Opportunities

Proportion of
revenue, assets,

or other business
activities aligned
with climate-related
opportunities

CDP: C4.2b;
SASB: EM-CM-410a.1 {Construction Materials Standard;

SASB: EM-SV-000.A, EM-SV-000.B (Oil and Gas Services
Standard;

European Commission Guidelines: Section 3.5,
Annex 1.5;

EU Taxonomy: Article 8;
EBA Guidelines (EBA/GL/11/2017)

+ Net premiums written related to energy efficiency
and low-carbon technology

+ Number of (1) zero-emissions vehicles (ZEV), (2)
hybrid vehicles, and (3) plug-in hybrid vehicles sold

+ Revenues from products or services that support
the transition to a low-carbon economy

+ Proportion of homes delivered certified to a third-
party, multiattribute green building standard

UBS:"77 “The year 2020 saw very strong momentum
in sustainable finance activities, indicated by
growth in Core Sustainable Investments (Core

SD, which rose by 62% to become 19% of all client
invested assets.”

Nordea:"# Investor presentation includes (1)
percentage breakdown of Green Bond Assets

by category, including energy efficiency, clean
transportation, pollution prevention and control,
green buildings, and renewable energy, and

(2) percentage breakdown by sub-category

({e.g., renewable energy type).

BMW: Investor presentation includes electric
vehicle sales and road map targets “at least 25
electrified models by 2023 including at least

13 fully electric cars” and "25% electrified” new
vehicle fleet by 2021.

Enel:" "53,6% net efficient installed renewable
capacity” as a percent oftotal capacity.”

BASF:"1 “Accelerator products (products
considered to make a ‘substantial sustainability
contribution in the value chain’) account for 30.39%
ofthe evaluated relevant portfolio.”

 

Capital Deployment

Amount of capital
expenditure,
financing, or
investment deployed
toward climate-
related risks and
opportunities

CDP: C2.3a, C2.4a, C3.3, C3.4, C4.2b; CDSB: REQ-02;
European Commission Guidelines: Section 3.5;

SASB: EM-EP-420a.4 (Oil and Gas Exploration
Standard)

+ Percentage of annual revenue invested in R&D
of low-carbon products/services

+ Investment in climate adaptation measures
(e.g., soil health, irrigation, technology)

Wells Fargo:®? Has invested a total of $8.9M

to “help communities build capacity to better
prepare for and respond to extreme weather and
climate-related events.”

Goldman Sachs:'# "Goldman Sachs entered
2020 with a new target to deploy $750 billion in
sustainable financing, investing and advisory
activity by the beginning of 2030. Over the course
of the year, we exceeded our expectations by
contributing $156 billion in such activity.”

BHP:%4 “Our operational expenditures for FY2020
for Low Emissions Technologies {(LET) projects,
including Research and Development (R&D), is
estimated to be US$28.2M. Part of our estimate
was calculated using FY2019 R&D spend data due
to differences in reporting time-frames.”

Equinor:'# “Our low-carbon and energy efficiency
R&D expenditure was around 25% in 2020, which
is a large increase from 2019."

 

Internal Carbon
Prices

Price on each ton

of GHG emissions
used internally by an
organization

CDP: CC2.2; SASB: NR0101-22, NRO201-16

+ Internal carbon price

+ Shadow carbon price, by geography

DES Bank:'% “Covering over 60% of companies

in our five sectors, the bottom-up assessment
assumed carbon price increase to USD 75/t CO.e,
holding the financials of our customers constant.”

Aker BP:%7 “Assumed carbon price reaches USD
235/t CO, in 2030, assumed flat thereafter,

we calculate the NPV of the total future carbon
costs under different carbon price assumptions,
shown as a percentage share ofthe NPV of Aker
BP's portfolio.”

SunCor:"## "Our 2020 carbon price outlook applies
provincial and federal carbon regimes within
Canada and a price of $30 per tonne of CO.e,
assuming a steady increase to approximately $100
per tonne on an increasing percentage of our
emissions by 2040."

 

7 UBS, ‘UBS extends sustainability leadership with rapid rise in 2020 invested assets and advances in ambitious dimate strategy," March 11, 2021

18 Nordea, Green bond investor presentation, February 2021, p.15

13 BMW Group, investor Presentation, December 2020, pp. 9 and 25
130 Enel, Sustainability Report 2020, May 2021, p. 11
131 BASF, BASF Report 2020, February 26, 2021, p.45

1# National Fish and Wildlife Foundation, “Wells Fargo Foundation and NFWF Announce Release ofthe Resilient Communities Program 2020 Request for Proposals,*January 23, 2020

18 Goldman Sachs, 2020 Sustainability Report, April 23, 2021, p.9

134 BHP, BHP Sustainability and ESG Navigators Databook 2020, September 15, 2020, n.p
15 Equinor, 2020 Sustainability Report, March 19, 2021, p. 30

136 DBS Bank, Sustainability Report 2020, March 2, 2021, p.23

137 Aker BP, Sustainability Report 2020, March 12, 2021, p.25

18 SunCor, Climate Risk and Resilience Report 2020, July 15, 2020, p. 22
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Information

Alignment (Non-Exhaustive)

Example Metrics

Financial Organization Examples

Non-Financial Organization Examples

 

Remuneration

Proportion

of executive
management
remuneration
linked to climate
considerations

CDP: C1.1a, C1.3a; CDSB: REQ-01; EU Taxonomy: 3.2;
IR: 4.9;

ECB Supervisory Expectation: 4.3;

EBA Guidelines under Articles 74(3) and 75(2) of
Directive 2013/36/EU and Article 450 of Regulation
{EU) No 575/201

+ Portion of employee’s annual discretionary bonus
linked to investments in climate-related products

+ Weighting of climate goals on long-term incentive
scorecards for Executive Directors

+ Weighting of performance against operational
emissions’ targets for remuneration scorecard

Barclays: “The Committee also considered
how our ambition to be net zero by 2050 should
be reflected in pay for the Executive Directors.
The decision was to include a standalone Climate
measure within the [Long-Term Incentive Plan
{LTIP}], providing clear alignment between the LTIP
outcome, up to a maximum of 10%, and progress
towards our targets which will help us to become
net zero by 2050. To accommodate the addition
of the Climate measure, the weighting for the Risk
Scorecard and Strategic non-financial measures
{excluding Climate) will be reduced to 10% each.”

Daimler:"# "Sustainability oriented targets can
raise or lower the annual bonus by up to +/-25%
and +/-10%, respectively.”

Unilever:"# “With the introduction ofthe
Sustainability Progress Index as à 25%
performance metric in our MCIP in 2017, we have
further strengthened the linkage between our
remuneration policy and Unilever's identity, values
and mission.”

Siemens:# "Since fiscal year 2020, the number
of Siemens shares (Stock Awards) that are actually
transferred depends 20% on the non-financial
performance criterion ‘sustainability. This is
assessed on the basis of Siemens internal ESG/
sustainability index, determined annually”

 

Financial Impact

 

Performance

Impact of climate-
related risks or
opportunities on
financial performance

CDP: C2.2a, C2.4a, CC3.2, 3.3, CC6.1; SASB: NR0O103-
14; CDSB: REQ-03;

CDP: C2.3a, C2.4a;
CDP: C2.4a, C3.4; CDSB: REQ-03; SASB: TRO101-10;
GRI: 307-1;

CDP: C2.4a; SASB: RT-AE-410a.1 (Aerospace, Defense
Standard);

SASB: FN-IN-450a.1;
European Commission Guidelines: Section 3.5, Annex 1;
ECB Supervisory Expectation: 7.2;

EU Taxonomy: Article 8

+ Increases in revenue from new products
or services from climate opportunities

+ Increases in cost due to carbon prices, business
interruption, contingency, or repairs

+ Changes to operating cash flow from changes
in upstream costs

+ Impairment charges due to assets exposed
to transition risks

+ Changes to total expected losses due
to physical risks

+ Probable Maximum Loss (PML) of insured
products from natural catastrophes

Citi:# "The adjusted probability of default (PD)}
and credit rating impacts of a global carbon price
varied significantly across companies, ranging
from a downgrade of 0 to 9 notches at $50/t CO,,
with an average of 3.5 notches.”

Hannon Armstrong:"# "Under à scenario where
a carbon tax drives the price of power up by
10%, our wind equity investments may generate
approximately 6% in additional cashflows

over their life as compared to the cashflow the
investments are expected to generate under
the current baseline scenario.”

Canadian Railway:'# "In 2019, Davenport, lowa
experienced major flooding from the Mississippi
River, and in response, CP raised approximately
three miles oftrack by three feet to keep the
trains operational during flooding, which cost
around $11M."

NextEra Energy:"5 "Our generation fleet

is now one of the cleanest and most efficient
in the country, saving customers $11.3 billion
in fuel costs.”

HPE:7"The company took a $93 million charge
in 2017 to pay for (Hurricane Harvey) storm
damages not covered by insurance claims.”

Meridian Energy:'# "The potential annualised
financial impact is $12 million. This is calculated
using the difference between the modelled

‘no climate change’ scenario and the Evolution
scenario and is based on modelling the potential
impact on Meridian generation revenues over
30 years and then annualised over the 2020

to 2050 timeframe."

 

13 Barclays PLC, Annual Report 2020, February 17, 2021, p. 132
149 Daimler, Annual Report 2020, February 18, 2021, p. 92

14 Unilever, “Statement on the implementation of Unilever’s remuneration policy," February 11, 2020, p. 5

1# Siemens, Annual Report 2020, November 27, 2020, p. 54.
18 Citi, Finance for a Climate-kesilient Future Il: Citi‘s 2020 TCFD Report, December 17, 2020, p. 23

18 Hannon Armstrong, United States Securities and Exchange Commission Form 10-K, February 22, 2021, p. 57.

1 Canadian Pacific, 2020 CDP Climate Change Questionnaire: CP Response, July 23, 2020, p. 18
146 NextEra Energy, Environmental, Social and Governance 2021 Report, May 20, 2021, p. 21

47 Gold, “Companies Climate Risks Are Often Unknown. Here's How One Opened Up," Wall Street Journal, March 14, 2021

148 Meridian Energy, Climate Change Disclosures Meridian Energy Limited FF20, August 2020, p. 8

63
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Information

Position

Impact of climate-
related risks or
opportunities on
financial position

Alignment (Non-Exhaustive)

CDP: C2.4a, C2.3a, C3.4, C2.2a; CDSB: REQ-03,
REQ-06; SASB: EM-EP-420a.1, FN-CB-410a.1;

CDP: C2.2a; CDSB: REQ-03;
CDP: 2.3a, C3.4;
CDP: C2.2a; CDSB: REQ-03;

SASB: EM-EP-420a.1 (Oil and Gas Exploration
Standard)

European Commission Guidelines: Annex 1;
ECB Supervisory Expectation: 7.5, 8.3, 8.6, 10, 12;
ECB ILAAP Principle: IV

1# Aberdeen Standard, TCFD and Environment Report, June 3, 2021, p. 23

150 Invesco, 2019 Invesco Climate Change Report, July 27, 2020, p. 31

Example Metrics

+ Changes to the carrying amount of assets due
to exposure to physical and transition risks

+ Changes to the expected portfolio given
climate-related risks and opportunities

* Changes in liability and equity due to increases
or decreases in assets (e.g., due to low-carbon
capital investments or to sale or write-offs of
stranded assets)

Financial Organization Examples

Aberdeen Standard:t# “Our MultiAsset Climate
Solutions fund, for example, comprises of
companies that derive over 50% of their revenues
from climate solutions. For this fund we saw that
for most scenarios and in our scenario mean, the
valuation implication was strongly positive under
our mean scenario as well as the tailends of Paris-
alignment and à continuation of current policy,

at least 64% of equity portfolios show an uplift in
value in comparison to the baseline.”

Invesco:"* “The carbon-managed portfolio
significantly reduces the negative impact ofthe
1.5°C scenario compared to the former strategy,
while keepingthe risk characteristics ofthe

UK benchmark." Figure shows à -5% change in
valuation under a 1,5°C scenario in the baseline
strategy relative to a roughly -3.4% change in the
carbon-managed strategy.

15! BP, “Progressing strategy development, bp revises long-term price assumptions, reviews intangible assets, and, as a result, expects non-cash impairments and'write-offs," June 15, 2020
15 Eni, Eni for 2020: Carbon Neutrality by 2050, May 12, 2021, p. 20

Non-Financial Organization Examples

BP: "These lower long-term price assumptions
are broadly in line with à range of transition
paths consistent with the Paris climate goals.
The aggregate second-quarter 2020 non-

cash, post-tax PP&E impairment charges and
exploration intangible write-offs will be in the
range of $13B to $17.5B."

Eni:"2 "The stress test, performed under the IEA
SDS scenario, showed that the overall book values
ofthe assets were stable with à reduction in fair
value of around 11%, or around 5% in the event

of contractual and fiscal recoverability of the costs
of direct CO, emissions. Analyses carried out on
the 3P reserves of the current upstream portfolio
confirmed their resilience and flexibility.”
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Appendix 3: Glossary and Abbreviations

ANNUAL OR INTEGRATED REPORTS refers
to reports that describe companies’ activities
for the preceding year (annual reports) orthe
broader range of measures that contribute to
companies’ long-term value and the role they
play in society (integrated reports).

BOARD OF DIRECTORS (OR BOARD) refers

to a body of elected or appointed members
who jointly oversee the activities of a company
or organization. Some countries use a two-
tiered system in which “board” refers to the
“supervisory board” and “key executives" refers
to the “management board."'#

CARBON FOOTPRINTING referstothe
calculation of the total greenhouse gas emissions
caused by an individual, event, organization,
service, or product expressed as a carbon
dioxide equivalent.

CLIMATE-RELATED OPPORTUNITY refers to

the potential positive impacts related to climate
change on a company or organization. Efforts

to mitigate and adapt to climate change can
produce opportunities for companies, such as
through resource efficiency and cost savings, the
adoption and utilization of low-emissions energy
sources, the development of new products and
services, and building resilience along the supply
chain. Climate-related opportunities will vary
depending on the region, market, and industry
where an organization operates.

CLIMATE-RELATED RISK refers to the

potential negative impacts of climate change

on a company or organization. Physical risks
emanating from climate change can be event-
driven (acute) such as increased severity

of extreme weather events (e.g., cyclones,
droughts, floods, fires). They can also relate to
longer-term shifts (chronic) in precipitation and
temperature and increased variability in weather
patterns (e.g., sea level rise}. Climate-related risks
can also be associated with the transition to a
lower-carbon global economy, the most common
of which relates to policy and legal actions,
technology changes, market responses, and
reputational considerations.

FINANCIAL FILINGS refers to the annual
reporting packages in which companies are
required to deliver their audited financial
results under the corporate, compliance,

or securities laws of the jurisdictions where
they operate. While reporting requirements
differ internationally, financial filings generally
contain financial statements and other
information such as governance statements
and management commentary.i$t

FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE refers to an
organization's income and expenses as reflected
on its income and cash flow statements (actual)
or potential income and expenses under
different climate-related scenarios.

FINANCIAL PLANNING refers to a company's
consideration of how it will achieve and fund its
objectives and strategic goals. The process of
financial planning allows companies to assess
future financial positions and determine how
resources can be utilized in pursuit of short-

and long-term objectives. As part of financial
planning, companies often create “financial plans”
that outline the specific actions, assets, and
resources (including capital) necessary to achieve
these objectives over a one-to-five-year period.
However, financial planning is broader than the
development of a financial plan as it includes long-
term capital allocation and other considerations
that may extend beyond the typical three-to-five-
year financial plan (e.g., investment, research and
development, manufacturing, markets).

FINANCIAL POSITION refers to an organization's
assets, liabilities, and equity as reflected on

its balance sheet (actual) or potential assets,
liabilities, and equity under different climate-
related scenarios.

GOVERNANCE refers to “the system by which
an organization is directed and controlled

in the interests of shareholders and other
stakeholders."'# “Governance involves à set
of relationships between an organization's
management, its board, its shareholders, and
other stakeholders. Governance provides the
structure and processes through which the
objectives of the organization are set, progress
against performance is monitored, and results
are evaluated.""#6

18 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), G20/0E CD Principles

of Corporate Governance, November 30, 2015

154 Based on Climate Disclosure Standards Board, CDSB Framework for Reporting Environmental

and Climate Change Information, December 2019

155 Cadbury, Report ofthe Committee on the Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance, December 1992

156 OECD, G20/0ECD Principles of Corporate Governance, November 30, 2015

65
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

GREENHOUSE GAS (GHG) EMISSIONS
SCOPE LEVELS'57

* Scope 1 refers to all direct GHG emissions.

* Scope 2 refers to indirect GHG emissions from
consumption of purchased electricity, heat,
or steam.

* Scope 3 refers to other indirect emissions
not covered in Scope 2 that occur in the value
chain of the reporting company, including both
upstream and downstream emissions. Scope
3 GHG emissions could include the extraction
and production of purchased materials and
fuels, transport-related activities in vehicles not
owned or controlled by the reporting entity,
electricity-related activities (e.g., transmission
and distribution losses), outsourced activities,
and waste disposal.i°®

IMPLIED TEMPERATURE RISE (ITR) refers to an
estimate of a global temperature rise associated
with the greenhouse gas emissions of a single
entity (e.g., a company) or a selection of entities
(e.g., those in a given investment portfolio, fund,
or investment strategy). Expressed as a numeric
degree rating, ITR metrics incorporate current
GHG emissions or other data and assumptions
to estimate expected future emissions
associated with the selected entity or entities.
Then the estimate is translated into a projected
increase in global average temperature (in °C)
above pre-industrial levels that would occur if
all companies in corresponding sectors had the
same carbon intensity as the selected asset(s).

INTERIM TARGET refers to a short-term
milestone between the organization's medium-
or long-term target and current period.

INTERNAL CARBON PRICE refers to a monetary
value on GHG emissions an organization uses
internally to guide its decision-making process
in relation to climate change impacts, risks, and
opportunities.'®

MANAGEMENT refers to those positions
a company or organization views as executive
or senior management positions.

NET-ZERO refers to achieving an equal balance
between GHG emissions produced and GHG
emissions removed from the atmosphere.

RISK refers to the possibility or likelihood that
actual results (operational or financial) deviate
from expected results in a manner that has an
effect on objectives at different levels (such as
strategic, organization-wide, project, product,
and process). Risk can be defined in many

ways but is often characterized by reference

to potential events and consequences, or a
combination of these, and expressed in terms of
a combination of the consequences of an event
{including changes in circumstances) and the
associated likelihood of occurrence. Uncertainty
is the state, even partial, of deficiency of
information related to understanding or
knowledge of an event and its consequence,

or likelihood. Risk conceptually equals the
probability or likelihood of hazardous events
occurring multiplied by the company's exposure
and vulnerability to the event.

RISK ASSESSMENT refers to a process consisting
of risk identification, risk analysis, and risk
evaluation. The essential building blocks for
comprehensively assessing risk (and establishing
metrics) are hazards, exposure, vulnerability, risk,
and impacts.

RISK MANAGEMENT refers to a set of
processes that are carried out by a company

or organization's board and management to
support the achievement of its objectives by
addressing its risks and managing the combined
potential impact of those risks.

SCENARIO ANALYSIS refers to a process for
identifying and assessing a potential range of
outcomes of future events under conditions
of uncertainty. In the case of climate change,
for example, scenarios allow an organization
to explore and develop an understanding of
how the physical and transition risks of climate
change may impact its businesses, strategies,
and financial performance over time.

SECTOR refers to a segment of companies
performing similar business activities in an
economy. À sector generally refers to a large
segment of the economy or grouping of business
types, while “industry” is used to describe more
specific groupings of companies within a sector.

157 World Resources Institute and World Business Council for Sustainable Development, The Greenhouse Gas
Protocol: A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard (Revised Edition), March 2004

158 World Resources Institute and World Business Council for Sustainable Development, The Corporate Value

Chain {Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard, April 16, 2014.

15 Based on World Bank, “What is Carbon Pricing?" Accessed September 20, 2021

66
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

STRATEGY refers to an organization's desired
future state. An organization's strategy
establishes a foundation against which it can
monitor and measure its progress in reaching
that desired state. Strategy formulation generally
involves establishing the purpose and scope

of the organization's activities and the nature

of its businesses, taking into account the risks
and opportunities it faces and the environment
where it operates.

SUSTAINABILITY REPORT refers to a report that
describes a company's or organization's impact
on society, often addressing environmental,
social, and governance issues.

TRANSITION PLAN refers to an aspect

of an organization's overall business strategy
that lays out a set of targets and actions
supporting its transition toward a low-carbon
economy, including actions such as reducing
its GHG emissions.

 

ABBREVIATIONS

 

1.5°C— 1.5° Celsius

2°C — 2° Celsius

CA100+— Climate Action 100+
CDSB — Climate Disclosure Standards Board
CO,e — Carbon dioxide equivalent

ESG — Environmental, social, and governance
FSB — Financial Stability Board

G20 — Group of 20

GFANZ — Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero

GHG — Greenhouse gas
GICS — Global Industry Classification Standard
GRI— Global Reporting Initiative

IFRS — International Financial Reporting
Standards

IRC — International Integrated Reporting Council

1OSCO — International Organization of Securities
Commissions

IPCC— Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change

ISSB— International Sustainability Standards
Board

NGFS — Network for Greeningthe Financial
System

NZIA — Net-Zero Insurance Alliance

PCAF — Partnership for Carbon Accounting
Financials

SASB — Sustainability Accounting Standards
Board

SBTi— Science Based Targets initiative

TCFD — Task Force on Climate-related Financial
Disclosures

UNFCCC— United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change

WACI— Weighted average carbon intensity

WBCSD — World Business Council for
Sustainable Development

67
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures
Appenaix Æ References

Aberdeen Standard. TCFD and Environment Report. June 3, 2021. https://www.aberdeenstandard.com/
docs?editionid=8add93e9-5b15-42da-a6f3-bee24b615677.

Aker BP. Sustainability Report 2020. March 12, 2021. https://mb.cision.com/Public/1629/3313545/
bdef52ed4fde0572.pdf.

Aldy, J. and G. Gianfrate. Future-Proof Your Climate Strategy. Harvard Business Review. May-June 2019.
https://hbr.org/2019/05/future-proof-your-climate-strategy.

The Alliance. Reporting on enterprise value: Ilustrated with a prototype climate-related financial disclosure
standard. December 2020. https://29kjwb3armds2g3gi4lq2sx1-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-
content/uploads/Reporting-on-enterprise-value_climate-prototype_Dec20.pdf.

Barclays PLC. Annual Report 2020. February 17, 2021. https://home.barclays/content/dam/home-
barclays/documents/investor-relations/reports-and-events/annual-reports/2020/Barclays-PLC-
Annual-Report-2020.pdf.

Barclays PLC. ESG Report 2020. February 18, 2021. https://home.barclays/content/dam/home-barclays/
documents/investor-relations/reports-and-events/annual-reports/2020/Barclays-PLC-2020-ESG-
Report-2020.pdf.

BASF. BASF Report 2020 (BASF Group). February 26, 2021. https://report.basf.com/2020/en/
servicepages/downloads/files/basf-report-2020-basf-ar20.pdf.

BBVA. BBVA Report on TCFD 2020. October 2020. https://shareholdersandinvestors.bhva.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/10/BBVA-report-on-TCFD_Eng.pdf.

BHP. Addressing greenhouse gas emissions beyond our operations: Understanding the ‘scope 3’ footprint
of our value chain. August 2018. https://www.bhp.com/-/media/documents/media/
prospects/180824_prospects_understandingscope3footprintofourvaluechain.
pdf?la=en#:-:text-Double%20counting%20between%20companies#%20is,the%20
simultaneous%20action%200f%20multiple.

BHP. BHP Sustainability and ESG Navigators Databook 2020. September 15, 2020. https://www.bhp.
com/-/media/documents/investors/annual-reports/2020/200914_sustainability-and-esg-
navigators-and-databook-2020.xIsx?la=en.

BHP. Climate Change Report 2020. September 10, 2020. https://www.bhp.com/-/media/documents/
investors/annual-reports/2020/200910_bhpclimatechangereport2020.pdf.

Blanco, Christian, Felipe Caro, and Charles]. Corbett. The State of Supply Chain Carbon Footprinting:
Analysis of CDP Disclosures by US Firms. May 17, 2016. http://manuscript.elsevier.com/
S0959652616308095/pdf/S0959652616308095.pdf.

BMW Group. /nvestor Presentation. December 2020. https://www.bmwgroup.com/content/dam/
grpw/websites/bmwgroup_com/ir/downloads/en/2020/Investor_Presentation/BMW_Investor_
Presentation_2020.pdf.

BP. “Progressing strategy development, bp revises long-term price assumptions, reviews intangible
assets, and, as a result, expects non-cash impairments and write-offs.” June 15, 2020.
https:/www.bp.com/en/global/corporate/news-and-insights/press-releases/bp-revises-long-
term-price-assumptions.html.

Cadbury, A. Report of the Committee on the Financial Aspects of Corporate Governance (The Cadbury
Report). 1992. http://cadbury.cibs.archios.info/report.

Canadian Pacific. 2020 CDP Climate Change Questionnaire: CP Response. July 23, 2020.
https://sustainability.cpr.ca/downloads/cdp-program-submission-2020.pdf.

68
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP). Carbon Pricing Corridors: The Market View 20717. May 2017. https://
b8f65chb373b1b7b15feb-c/0d8ead6ced550b4d987d7c03fcdd1id.ssi.cf3.rackcdn.com/cms/reports/
documents/000/002/112/original/Carbon-Pricing-Corridors-the-market-view.pdf?1495638527.

CDP. Closing the Gap: Scaling Up Sustainable Supply Chains. November 2018. https:/www.cdp.net/en/
research/global-reports/global-supply-chain-report-2018.

CDP. Carbon Pricing Corridors: The Market View 2018. July 2018. https://6fefchb86e6tafib2fc4-
c/Od8ead6ced550b4d987d7c03fcddid.ssi.cf3.rackcdn.com/cms/reports/
documents/000/003/326/original/Carbon-Pricing-Corridors-2018.pdf?1526464647.

CDP. Putting À Price on Carbon: The state of internal carbon pricing by corporates globally. April 2021.
https://6fefchb86e61afib2fc4-c70Od8ead6ced550b4d987d7c03fcddid.ssl.cf3.rackcdn.com/
cms/reports/documents/000/005/651/original/CDP_Global_Carbon_Price_report_2021.
pdf?1618938446.

CDP. The Time to Green Finance: CDP Financial Services Disclosure Report 2020. April 2020.
https://6fefchb86e61afib2fc4-c70Od8ead6ced550b4d987d7c03fcddid.ssl.cf3.rackcdn.com/
cms/reports/documents/000/005/741/original/CDP-Financial-Services-Disclosure-Report-2020.
pdf?1619537981.

CDP. Transparency to Transformation: À Chain Reaction. February 2021. https://6fefchb86e61afth2fc4-
c/Od8ead6ced550b4d987d7c03fcddid.ssi.cf3.rackcdn.com/cms/reports/
documents/000/005/554/original/CDP_SC_Report_2020.pdf?1614160765.

CDP. United Airlines Holdings Climate Change 2020 Report. 2020. https://www.cdp.net/en/
responses/195697.

Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition. Construction Industry Value Chain: How Companies Are Using
Carbon Pricing to Address Climate Risk and Find New Opportunities. 2018. https://openknowledge.
worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/31055/132770-WP-Construction-Industry-Value-Chain-
PUBLIC.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.

Carbon Pricing Leadership Coalition. Report ofthe High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices. May
29, 2017. https://staticl.squarespace.com/static/54ff9c5ce4b0a53decccfh4c/t/59b7f2409f8d
ce5316811916/1505227332748/CarbonPricing_FullReport.pdf.

Carbon Pricing Unlocked. How-To Guide to Corporate Internal Carbon Pricing. December 2017. http://
b8f65cb373b1b/7b15feb-c/0d8ead6ced550b4d987d/c03fcddid.r81.cf3.rackcdn.com/cms/
reports/documents/000/002/740/original/cpu-2017-how-to-guide-to-internal-carbon-pricing.
pdf?1521554897.

Carbon Pricing Unlocked. /nternal Carbon Pricing for Future-Proof Supply Chaïns. January 2020.
https://guidehouse.com/-/media/www/site/insights/energy/2020/carbon-pricing-unlocked-2020-
icp-supply-chains.pdf.

Carbon Pricing Unlocked. /nternal Carbon Pricing for Low-Carbon Finance. July 2019.
https://6fefchb86e61afib2fc4-c70Od8eadéced550b4d987d7c03fcddid.ssl.cf3.rackcdn.com/cms/
reports/documents/000/004/655/original/carbon_pricing_unlocked_internal_carbon_pricing_
low-carbon_finance.pdf?1563353352.

Center for Climate and Energy Solutions. The Business of Pricing Carbon: How Companies are Pricing
Carbon to Mitigate Risks and Prepare for a Low-Carbon Future. September 2017.
https://www.c2es.org/document/the-business-of-pricing-carbon-how-companies-are-pricing-
carbon-to-mitigate-risks-and-prepare-for-a-low-carbon-future/.

Citi. Finance for a Climate-Resilient Future Il: Citi‘s 2020 TCFD Report. December 17, 2020. https://www.
citigroup.com/citi/sustainability/data/finance-for-a-climate-resilient-future-2.pdf?ieNocache=90.

Climate Action 100+. “Blog: Climate Action 100+ Zeroes In On Industry-Wide Decarbonization”.
August 2021. https://www.climateaction100.org/news/blog-climate-action-100-zeroes-in-on-
industry-wide-decarbonisation/.

69
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

Climate Action 100+. “Climate Action 100+." https://www.climateaction100.org/.

Climate Action 100+. “Climate Action 100+ Net Zero Company Benchmark." March 2021.
https:/www.climateaction100.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/Climate-Action-100-Benchmark-
Indicators-FINAL-3.12.pdf.

Climate Action 100+. “Net-Zero Company Benchmark." Accessed April 30, 2021. https://www.
climateaction100.org/progress/net-zero-company-benchmark/.

Climate Disclosure Standards Board. CDSB Framework for Reporting Environmental and Climate Change
Information. December 2019. https:/www.cdsb.net/sites/default/files/cdsb_framework_2019_
v2.2.pdf.

ConEdison. Climate Change Vulnerability Study. December 2019. https:/www.coned.com/-/media/
files/coned/documents/our-energy-future/our-energy-projects/climate-change-resiliency-plan/
climate-change-vulnerability-study.pdf?la=en.

ConEdison. 2020 Climate Change Resilience and Adaptation. January 2021. https://www.coned.com/-/
media/files/coned/documents/our-energy-future/our-energy-projects/climate-change-resiliency-
plan/climate-change-resilience-adaptation-2020.pdf.

The Conference Board. {nternal Carbon Pricing: À Key Element of Climate Strategy. January 2021.
https://conference-board.org/pdfdownload.cfm?masterProductiD=23586.

Corporate Reporting Dialogue. “Better Alignment Project." https://corporatereportingdialogue.com/
better-alignment-project/#report.

CPP Investments. Report on Sustainable Investing 2020. November 2020. https://cdn2.cppinvestments.
com/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/CPP-Investments-2020-SI-Report-EN-Optimized.pdf.

CRO Forum. Carbon footprinting methodology for underwriting portfolios. April 29, 2020. https://www.
thecroforum.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/CRO-Carbon-Foot-Printing-Methodology.pdf.

Daimler. Annual Report 2020. February 18, 2021. https://www.daimler.com/documents/investors/
reports/annual-report/daimler/daimler-ir-annual-report-2020-incl-combined-management-
report-daimler-ag.pdf.

DBS Group Holdings Ltd. Stronger Together: Sustainability Report 2020. March 2, 2021. https://links.
sgx.com/1.0.0/corporate-announcements/02EJ20XRJ2L83UP7/651247_DBS%20Sustainability%20
Report%202020.pdf.

Dharmesh, S.“Measuring What Matters: How to Pick À Good Metric." OnStartUps Blog. March 29,
2013. https://www.onstartups.com/tabid/3339/bid/96738/Measuring-What-Matters-How-To-
Pick-A-Good-Metric.aspx.

Dow. “Dow signs four renewable power agreements to achieve 2025 Goal and lead petrochemical
industry." June 17, 2020. https://www.dow.com/en-us/news/dow-signs-four-renewable-power-
agreements-to-achieve-2025-goal.html.

EBRD and Global Centre of Excellence on Climate Adaptation. Advancing TCFD Guidance on Physical
Climate Risks and Opportunities. May 2018. https:/www.physicalclimaterisk.com/media/EBRD-
GCECA_draft_final_report_full.pdf.

Eckerson, W.“12 Characteristics of Effective Metrics.” Transforming Data With Intelligence (TDWI
Blog). April 19, 2010. https://tdwi.org/Blogs/TDWI-Blog/2010/04/Effective-Metrics.aspx?m=1.

EDF. “Corporate social responsibility: Carbon neutrality by 2050." https://www.edf.fr/en/the-edf-
group/taking-action-as-a-responsible-company/our-six-corporate-responsibility-goals/doing-
even-more-to-reduce-co2-emissions.

Enel. Integrated Annual Report 2020. https://www.enel.com/content/dam/enel-com/documenti/
investitori/informazioni-finanziarie/2020/annuali/en/integrated-annual-report_2020.pdf.

Enel. Sustainability Report 2020. May 2021. https://www.enel.com/content/dam/enel-com/documenti/
investitori/sostenibilita/2020/sustainability-report_2020.pdf.

70
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

The Energy & Climate Intelligence Unit and Oxford Net Zero. Taking Stock: À global assessment of net
zero targets. March 23, 2021. https://eciu.net/analysis/reports/2021/taking-stock-assessment-net-
zero-targets.

Eni. “Eni for 2020: Carbon neutrality by 2050." 2020. https://www.eni.com/assets/documents/eng/just-
transition/2020/Eni-for-2020-Carbon-neutrality-by-2050.pdf.

Equinor. Sustainability Report 2020. March 19, 2021. https://www.equinor.com/content/dam/statoil/
documents/sustainability-reports/2020/equinor-sustainability-report-2020-LR.pdf.

ERAFP. Public Report 2020. August 3, 2021. https://www.rafp.fr/en/sites/rafp_en/files/publication/file/
rafp-ra-2020-uk-web-v2.pdf.

European Commission. “Communication from the Commission: Guidelines on non-financial reporting:
Supplement on reporting climate-related information (2019/C 209/01)." June 20, 2019.
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52019XC0620(01)&from=GA.

European Commission. “Corporate sustainability reporting." September 21, 2021. https://ec.europa.
eu/info/business-economy-euro/company-reporting-and-auditing/company-reporting/
corporate-sustainability-reporting_en.

European Commission. “Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive.” April 21, 2021. https://eur-lex.
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52021PC0189.

European Commission. “Non-Financial Reporting Directive.” October 22, 2014. https://eur-lex.europa.
eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32014L0095.

European Innovation Council and SMEs Executive Agency (European Commission). Trade Secrets:
Managing Confidential Business Information. July 2021. https://0p.europa.eu/en/publication-
detail/-/publication/Sfic6d8a-f015-11eb-a71c-01aa75ed7/1a1/language-en/format-PDF/
source-227370609.

EU Technical Expert Group on Sustainable Finance (EU TEG). Taxonomy Report: Technical Annex. March
9, 2020. https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/business_economy_euro/banking_and_
finance/documents/200309-sustainable-finance-teg-final-report-taxonomy-annexes_en.pdf.

EU TEG. Technical Report. March 9, 2020.https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/business_
economy_euro/banking_and_finance/documents/200309-sustainable-finance-teg-final-report-
taxonomy_en.pdf.

Financial Conduct Authority, “Enhancing climate-related disclosures by asset managers, life insurers,
and FCA-regulated pension providers: Consultation paper.” June 2021. https://www.fca.org.uk/
publication/consultation/cp21-17.pdf.

GHG Protocol. A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard (Revised Edition). March 2004.
https:/ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/ghg-protocol-revised.pdf.

GHG Protocol. “Corporate Standard." https://ghgprotocol.org/corporate-standard.

GHG Protocol. Corporate Value Chain (Scope 3) Accounting and Reporting Standard. 2011.
https:/ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/standards/Corporate-Value-Chain-Accounting-
Reporing-Standard_041613_2.pdf.

GHG Protocol. “Frequently Asked Questions." https://ghgprotocol.org/calculationg-tools-faq.

GHG Protocol. Land Sector and Removals Initiative. July 2021. https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/
files/GHG%20Protocol%20-%20Land%20Sector%20and%20Removals%20Initiative#%20-%20
Overview#%20%287-21%29%20v2.pdf.

GHG Protocol. “New Greenhouse Gas Protocol Guidance on Carbon Removals and Land Use.” October

15,2019. https://ghgprotocol.org/blog/new-greenhouse-gas-protocol-guidance-carbon-removals-
and-land-use.

71
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

GHG Protocol. Technical Guidance for Calculating Scope 3 Emissions (Version 1). 2013.
https:/ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/files/ghgp/Scope3_Calculation_Guidance.pdf.

Gold, R.“Companies’ Climate Risks Are Often Unknown. Here’s How One Opened Up.” Wall Street
Journal. March 14, 2021. https:/www.wsj.com/articles/companies-climate-risks-are-often-
unknown-heres-how-one-opened-up-11615738526.

Goldman Sachs. 2020 Sustainability Report. April 23, 2021. https://www.goldmansachs.com/our-
commitments/sustainability/sustainable-finance/documents/reports/2020-sustainability-report.
pdf?source=website.

Hannon Armstrong Sustainable Infrastructure Capital, Inc. Form 10-K 2020. February 22, 2021. https://
di8rn0p25nwr6d.cloudfront.net/CIK-0001561894/e54092ce-7ecd-424calef-5a3bdb802dbb.html.

Hoffmann, V. H. andT. Busch. “Corporate Carbon Performance Indicators: Carbon intensity,
Dependency, Exposure, and Risk." Journal of Industrial Ecology, Vol. 12, Number 4.
November 11, 2008. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/j1530-9290.2008.00066.x.

HSBC. TCFD Update 2020. Feb 24, 2021. https:/www.hsbc.com/-/files/hsbc/investors/hshbc-
results/2020/annual/pdfs/hsbc-holdings-plc/210223-task-force-on-climate-related-financial-
disclosures-tcfd-update-2020.pdf?download=1.

ICMA. “Green Bond Principles: Voluntary Process Guidelines for Issuing Green Bonds.” June 2021.
https:/www.icmagroup.org/assets/documents/Sustainable-finance/2021-updates/Green-Bond-
Principles-June-2021-140621.pdf.

Imarinen. Annual and Sustainability Report 2020. March 24, 2021. https://www.ilmarinen.fi/media_
global/liitepankki/ilmarinen/taloudellisia-tietoja/vuosikertomus/2020/ilmarinens-annual-and-
sustainability-report-2020.pdf.

ING. Terra progress report. November 16, 2020. https://www.ing.com/MediaEditPage/2020-ING-Terra-
progress-report.htm.

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Global Warming of 1.5°C: Summary for
Policymakers. October 2018. https:/www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2018/07/SR15_SPM_
version_stand_alone_LR.pdf.

IPCC. “Special Report: Global warming of 1.5°C Glossary.” Accessed September 2, 2021.
https:/www.ipec.ch/sr15/chapter/glossary/.

IPCC. Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C. https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/.

IPCC. “Summary for Policymakers of IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C approved by
governments." October 8, 2018. https:/www.ipcc.ch/2018/10/08/summary-for-policymakers-of-
ipce-special-report-on-global-warming-of-1-Scapproved-by-governments/.

IPCC. Oppenheimer, et al. Emergent risks and key vulnerabilities; Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom
and New York, NY, USA. 2014. pp. 1039-1099. https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/
WGIHARS-Chap19_FINAL.pdf.

International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). Consultation Paper on Sustainability Reporting.
September 2020. https:/www.ifrs.org/content/dam/ifrs/project/sustainability-reporting/
consultation-paper-on-sustainability-reporting.pdf.

IFRS. “IFRS Foundation Trustees announce next steps in response to broad demand for global
sustainability standards.” February 2, 2021. https://www.ifrs.org/news-and-events/
news/2021/02/trustees-announce-next-steps-in-response-to-broad-demand-for-global-
sustainability-standards/.

IFRS. “IFRS Foundation Trustees announce strategic direction and further steps based on feedback
to sustainability reporting consultation." March 8, 2021. https://www.ifrs.org/news-and-events/
news/2021/03/trustees-announce-strategic-direction-based-on-feedback-to-sustainability-
reporting-consultation/.

72
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

IFRS. “IFRS Foundation Trustees announce working group to accelerate convergence in global
sustainability reporting standards focused on enterprise value" March 22, 2021.
https:/www.ifrs.org/news-and-events/news/2021/03/trustees-announce-working-group/.

International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). “IOSCO sees an urgent need for
globally consistent, comparable, and reliable sustainability disclosure standards and announces
its priorities and vision for a Sustainability Standards Board under the IFRS Foundation.” February
24, 2021. https://www.iosco.org/news/pdf/IOSCONEWS594.pdf.

IOSCO. Report on Sustainability-related Issuer Disclosures. June 28, 2021. https://www.iosco.org/library/
pubdocs/pdf/I0OSCOPD678.pdf.

Invesco. 2019 Invesco Climate Change Report. https://www.invesco.com/content/dam/invesco/apac/
en/pdf/insights/2020/july-2020/invesco-tcfd-task-force-on-climate-related-financial-disclosures-
report-jul-2020.pdf.

Kepler-Cheuvreux. Carbon Compass: Investor Guide to Carbon Footprinting. Institutional Investors
Group on Climate Change, 2° Investing Initiative, and Deloitte. November 23, 2015. https://www.
longfinance.net/media/documents/Kepler_ Cheuvreux_2015_- Carbon_Compass.pdf.

Kooroshy,]. et al. Towards investor-oriented carbon targets data. FTSE Russell. October 2021.
https:/www.ftserussell.com/research/towards-investor-oriented-carbon-targets-data.

Liberty Mutual. Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures Report. April 2021.
https:/www.libertymutualgroup.com/documents/task-force-climate-financial-disclosures.pdf.

Meridian Energy. Climate Change Disclosures Meridian Energy Limited FY20. August 2020.
https:/www.meridianenergy.co.nz/assets/Sustainability/Meridian-Climate-Change-Disclosures-
TCFD-Report-FY20.pdf.

Mikolajezjk, et al. {nternal Carbon Pricing and Climate Finance Tracking for Banks. September 2017.
https:/www.climatefocus.com/sites/default/files/Carbon%20Pricing%20and%20Climate%20
Finance%20Tracking%20Report%202017.pdf.

MSCI. “ACWI Index." Accessed August 30, 2021. https:/www.msci.com/acwi.

National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. “Wells Fargo Foundation and NFWEF Announce Release
of the Resilient Communities Program 2020 Request for Proposals." January 23, 2020.
https:/www.nfwf.org/media-center/press-releases/wells-fargo-foundation-and-nfwf-announce-
release-resilient-communities-program-2020-request.

Nestlé. Nestlé's Net Zero Roadmap. February 2021. https://www.nestle.com/sites/default/files/2020-12/
nestle-net-zero-roadmap-en.pdf.

Network for Greening the Financial System. Progress Report on Bridging Data Gaps. May 26, 2021.
https:/www.ngfs.net/sites/default/files/medias/documents/progress_report_on_bridging_data_
gaps.pdf.

Net-Zero Asset Owner Alliance. /naugural 2025 Target Setting Protocol. March 2021. https://www.unepfi.
org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2021/01/Alliance-Target-Setting-Protocol-2021.pdf.

Net-Zero Insurance Alliance. “Statement of commitment by signatory companies."
https:/www.unepfi.org/psi/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/NZIA-Commitment.pdf.

NextEra Energy. Environmental, Social and Governance 2021 Report. May 20, 2021.
https:/Wwww.nexteraenergy.com/content/dam/nee/us/en/pdf/2021_NEE_ESG_Report.pdf.

Nordea. Green bond investor presentation. February 2021. https://www.nordea.com/en/doc/nordea-
green-bond-investor-presentation-2021.pdf.

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. G20/OFCD Principles of Corporate
Governance. 2015. https://www.oecd.org/daf/ca/Corporate-Governance-Principles-ENG.pdf.

73
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

@rsted. 2020 Sustainability Report. February 2021. https://orstedcdn.azureedge.net/-/media/
annual2020/sustainability-report-2020.ashx?la=en&rev=552cd4dd/7bc3499c8bf2311549d-
36b94&hash=53664FE832CA1812F310DE35856DA3F4.

Paris Aligned Investment Initiative. Net Zero Investment Framework: Implementation Guide. March 2021.
https:/www.parisalignedinvestment.org/media/2021/03/PAII-Net-Zero-Investment-Framework_
Implementation-Guide.pdf.

Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials (PCAF). Global GHG Accounting and Reporting Standard
for the Financial Industry. First Edition. November 18, 2020. https://carbonaccountingfinancials.
com/files/downloads/PCAF-Global-GHG-Standard.pdf.

PCAF. “Partnership for Carbon Accounting Financials collaborates with UN-convened Net-Zero
Insurance Alliance to develop standard to measure insured emissions.” September 6, 2021.
https:/www.unepfi.org/psi/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/PCAF-NZIA-announcement.pdf.

Portfolio Alignment Team (PAT). Weasuring Portfolio Alignment: Assessing the Position of Companies and
Portfolios on the Path to Net Zero. 2020. https:/www.tcfdhub.org/resource/measuring-portfolio-
alignment-assessing-the-position-of-companies-and-portfolios-on-the-path-to-net-zero/.

PAT. Measuring Portfolio Alignment: Technical Considerations. October 2021. https://www.tcfdhub.org/
resource/measuring-portfolio-alignment-technical-considerations.

PAT. Measuring Portfolio Alignment: Technical Supplement. June 7, 2021. https://assets.bhhub.io/
company/sites/60/2021/05/2021-TCFD-Portfolio_Alignment_Technical_Supplement.pdf.

Riahi, K., et al. The shared socioeconomic pathways and their energy, land use, and greenhouse gas
emissions implications: an overview. January 2017. https://wwuw.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/50959378016300681.

Science Based Targets initiative (SBTi). Criteria and Recommendations. TWG-INF-002 Version 4.2.
April 2021. https://sciencebasedtargets.org/resources/files/SBTi-criteria.pdf.

SBTi. Financial Sector Science-Based Targets Guidance. Pilot Version 1.1. April 2021.
https://sciencebasedtargets.org/resources/files/Financial-Sector-Science-Based-Targets-
Guidance-Pilot-Version.pdf.

SBTi. Science-Based Target Setting Manual. Version 4.1. April 2020. https://sciencebasedtargets.org/
resources/legacy/2017/04/SBTi-manual.pdf.

SBTi. Value Change in the Value Chain: Best Practices in Scope 3 Greenhouse Gas Management. May 25,
2018. https://sciencebasedtargets.org/resources/files/SBT Value_Chain_Report-1.pdf.

Siemens. Annual Report 2020. November 27, 2020. https://assets.new.siemens.com/siemens/assets/
api/uuid:7e60bb9a-dbad-41ff-8803-a98776d4aîf1/Siemens-AR2020-Compensation-Report.pdf.

SunCor. Climate Risk and Resilience Report 2020. July 15, 2020. https://sustainability-prd-cdn.suncor.
com/-/media/project/ros/shared/documents/climate-reports/2020-climate-risk-and-resilience-
report-en.pdf?modified=20201216022313.

Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB). Climate Risk Technical Bulletin. April 13, 2021.
https:/www.sasb.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/Climate-Risk-Technical-Bulletin2021-
041221pm.pdf.

SASB. SASB Conceptual Framework. February 2017. https://www.sasb.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/05/SASB-Conceptual-Framework.pdf.

Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD). Final Report: Recommendations of the Task
Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures. June 29, 2017. https://assets.bbhhub.io/company/
sites/60/2020/10/FINAL-2017-TCFD-Report-11052018.pdf.

TCFD. Forward-Looking Financial Sector Metrics Consultation. October 29, 2020. https://assets.bhhub.io/
company/sites/60/2021/03/2020-TCFD-Forward-Looking-Financial-Metrics-Consultation.pdf.

74
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

TCFD. Forward-Looking Financial Sector Metrics Consultation: Summary of Responses. March 2021.
https://assets.bbhub.io/company/sites/60/2021/03/Summary-of-Forward-Looking-Financial-
Metrics-Consultation.pdf.

TCFD. Guidance on Risk Management Integration and Disclosure. October 29, 2020.
https:/www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/P291020-2.pdf.

TCFD. Guidance on Scenario Analysis for Non-Financial Companies. October 29, 2020. https://assets.
bbhub.io/company/sites/60/2020/09/2020-TCFD_Guidance-Scenario-Analysis-Guidance.pdf.

TCFD. /mplementing the Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (2017
annex). June 29, 2017. https:/www.fsb-tcfd.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/FINAL-TCFD-Annex-
Amended-121517.pdf.

TCFD. /mplementing the Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures
(2021 annex). October 14, 2021. https://assets.bbhub.io/company/sites/60/2021/07/2021-TCFD-
Implementing_Guidance.pdf.

TCFD. Proposed Guidance on Climate-Related Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans. June 7, 2021.
https://assets.bbhub.io/company/sites/60/2021/05/2021-TCFD-Metrics_Targets_Guidance.pdf.

TCFD. Proposed Guidance on Metrics, Targets, and Transition Plans Consultation: Summary of Responses.
October 14, 2021. https://assets.bbhub.io/company/sites/60/2021/08/Summary-of-June-2021-
Public-Consultation.pdf.

TCFD. 2018 Status Report. September 2018. https://assets.bhhub.io/company/sites/60/2020/10/FINAL-
2018-TCFD-Status-Report-092518.pdf.

TCFD. 2019 Status Report. June 5, 2019. https://assets.bhhub.io/company/sites/60/2020/10/2019-TCFD-
Status-Report-FINAL-0531191.pdf.

TCFD. 2020 Status Report. October 29, 2020. https://assets.bhhub.io/company/sites/60/2020/09/2020-
TCFD_Status-Report.pdf.

TCFD. 2021 Status Report. October 14, 2021. https://assets.bhhub.io/company/sites/60/2021/07/2021-
TCFD-Status_Report.pdf.

TCFD Knowledge Hub. “Knowledge Hub Home." Accessed September 24, 2021.
https://www.tcfdhub.org/.

Temasek. “Focusing on Climate Change." Accessed May 6, 2021. https://www.temasek.com.sg/en/
sustainability/focusing-on-climate-change.

UBS. “UBS extends sustainability leadership with rapid rise in 2020 invested assets and advances
in ambitious climate strategy." March 11, 2021. https://www.ubs.com/global/en/media/display-
page-ndp/en-20210311-sustainability-report.html.

UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). COP26 And the Glasgow Financial Alliance
for Net Zero (GFANZ). April 21, 2021. https://racetozero.unfccc.int/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/
GFANZ.pdf.

UNEFCCC. “Paris Agreement." December 2015. https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/english_paris_
agreement.pdf.

UNEFCCC. “Press Release: New Financial Alliance for Net Zero Emissions Launches.” April 21, 2021.
https://unfccc.int/news/new-financial-alliance-for-net-zero-emissions-launches.

UNFCCC. “Race to Zero Campaign.” Accessed August 2021. https://unfccc.int/climate-action/race-to-
zero-campaign#eg-1.

Unilever. “Statement on the implementation of Unilever's remuneration policy.” February 11, 2020.
https:/www.unilever.com/Images/statement-on-the-implementation-of-unilevers-remuneration-
policy_tcm244-544072_en.pdf.

75
A.
Overview and Background

B.
Scope and Approach

C.
Climate-Related Metrics

D.
Climate-Related Targets

E.
Transition Plans

F.
Financial Impacts

Appendices

 

 

The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures

van Oudenhoven, À. P.E., et al. Key criteria for developing ecosystem service indicators to inform decision
making. Ecological Indicators 95: 417-426. August 14, 2018. https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S1470160X18304606.

Weber, C. et. al. Exploring Metrics to Measure the Climate Progress of Banks. World Resources Institute,
UNEP Finance Initiative, and 20 Investing Initiative. May 24, 2018. https://www.wriorg/
publication/exploring-metrics-to-measure-the-climate-progress-of-banks.

World Bank. “What is Carbon Pricing?" Accessed September 20, 2021. https://carbonpricingdashboard.
worldbank.org/what-carbon-pricing.

World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD). “Construction and Building
Materials share TCFD implementation experience.” July 2020. https://www.wbcsd.org/
Programs/Redefining-Value/TCFD/Resources/Construction-and-Building-Materials-share-TCFD-
implementation-experience.

WBCSD. Emerging Practices in Internal Carbon Pricing: À Practical Guide. December 4, 2015.
https:/www.wbcsd.org/contentwbc/download/1367/17733/1.

WBCSD. Food, Agriculture and Forest Products TCFD Preparer Forum. April 2020. https://docs.wbcsd.
org/2020/04/WBCSD-TCFD-Food-Agriculture-and-Forest-Products%C2%AC-Preparer-Fourm-
report.pdf.

WBCSD. “Planning to scale the e-mobility transition: climate-related financial disclosure
and the automotive sector.” May 2021. https://www.wbcsd.org/Programs/Redefining-Value/TCFD/
Resources/Planning-to-scale-the-e-mobility-transition-climate-related-financial-disclosure-and-
the-automotive-sector.

WBCSD. TCFD Electric Utilities Preparer Forum. July 2019. https://docs.wbcsd.org/2019/07/WBCSD_
TCFD_Electric_Utilities_Preparer_Forum.pdf.

WBCSD and World Resources Institute. The Greenhouse Gas Protocol: À Corporate Accounting
and Reporting Standard (Revised Edition). March 2004. https://ghgprotocol.org/corporate-standard.

WWF. Overcoming Barriers for Corporate Scope 3 Action in the Supply Chain. November 2019.
https:/www.wwf.de/fileadmin/fm-wwf/Publikationen-PDF/WWE-Overcoming-barriers-for-
corporate-scope-3.pdf.

Yale University. {internal Carbon Pricing: Policy Framework and Case Studies. https://chey.yale.edu/sites/
default/files/2019-09/Internal%20Carbon%20Pricing%20Report%20Feb%202019.pdf.

76
For more information, please visit fsb-tcfd.org

Nothing in this document constitutes an offer or a solicitation of an offer to buy or sell a security or financial instrument or investment advice or recommendation
of a security or financial instrument. The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures believes the information herein was obtained from reliable sources
but does not guarantee its accuracy. Copyright 2021 The Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures.
