 

 

This is an extract from the Final Recommendations Report. View the document in full here.

 

 

B Climate-Related Risks, Opportunities, and Financial Impacts

Through its work, the Task Force identified à growing demand by investors, lenders, insurance
underwriters, and other stakeholders for decision-useful, climate-related financial information.
Improved disclosure of climate-related risks and opportunities will provide investors, lenders,
insurance underwriters, and other stakeholders with the metrics and information needed to
undertake robust and consistent analyses of the potential financial impacts of climate change.

The Task Force found that while several climate-related disclosure frameworks have emerged
across different jurisdictions in an effort to meet the growing demand for such information, there
is a need for a standardized framework to promote alignment across existing regimes and G20
jurisdictions and to provide a common framework for climate-related financial disclosures. An
important element of such a framework is the consistent categorization of climate-related risks
and opportunities. As a result, the Task Force defined categories for climate-related risks and
climate-related opportunities. The Task Force’s recommendations serve to encourage
organizations to evaluate and disclose, as part of their annual financial filing preparation and
reporting processes, the climate-related risks and opportunities that are most pertinent to their
business activities. The main climate-related risks and opportunities that organizations should
consider are described below and in Tables 1 and 2 (pp. 10-11).

1. Climate-Related Risks

The Task Force divided climate-related risks into two major categories: (1} risks related to the
transition to a lower-carbon economy and (2) risks related to the physical impacts of climate
change.

a. Transition Risks

Transitioning to a lower-carbon economy may entail extensive policy, legal, technology, and
market changes to address mitigation and adaptation requirements related to climate change.
Depending on the nature, speed, and focus of these changes, transition risks may pose varying
levels of financial and reputational risk to organizations.

Policy and Legal Risks

Policy actions around climate change continue to evolve. Their objectives generally fall into two
categories—policy actions that attempt to constrain actions that contribute to the adverse effects
of climate change or policy actions that seek to promote adaptation to climate change. Some
examples include implementing carbon-pricing mechanisms to reduce GHG emissions, shifting
energy use toward lower emission sources, adopting energy-efficiency solutions, encouraging
greater water efficiency measures, and promoting more sustainable land-use practices. The risk
associated with and financial impact of policy changes depend on the nature and timing of the
policy change.

Another important risk is litigation or legal risk. Recent years have seen an increase in climate-
related litigation claims being brought before the courts by property owners, municipalities,
states, insurers, shareholders, and public interest organizations.” Reasons for such litigation
include the failure of organizations to mitigate impacts of climate change, failure to adapt to
climate change, and the insufficiency of disclosure around material financial risks. As the value of
loss and damage arising from climate change grows, litigation risk is also likely to increase.

Emerging Trends in Climate Change Litigation
Technology Risk

Technological improvements or innovations that support the transition to a lower-carbon, energy-
efficient economic system can have a significant impact on organizations. For example, the
development and use of emerging technologies such as renewable energy, battery storage,
energy efficiency, and carbon capture and storage will affect the competitiveness of certain
organizations, their production and distribution costs, and ultimately the demand for their
products and services from end users. To the extent that new technology displaces old systems
and disrupts some parts of the existing economic system, winners and losers will emerge from
this “creative destruction” process. The timing of technology development and deployment,
however, is a key uncertainty in assessing technology risk.

Market Risk

While the ways in which markets could be affected by climate change are varied and complex,
one of the major ways is through shifts in supply and demand for certain commodities, products,
and services as climate-related risks and opportunities are increasingly taken into account.

Reputation Risk

Climate change has been identified as à potential source of reputational risk tied to changing
customer or community perceptions of an organization's contribution to or detraction from the
transition to a lower-carbon economy.

b. Physical Risks

Physical risks resulting from climate change can be event driven (acute) or longer-term shifts
(chronic) in climate patterns. Physical risks may have financial implications for organizations, such
as direct damage to assets and indirect impacts from supply chain disruption. Organizations’
financial performance may also be affected by changes in water availability, sourcing, and quality;
food security; and extreme temperature changes affecting organizations’ premises, operations,
supply chain, transport needs, and employee safety.

Acute Risk
Acute physical risks refer to those that are event-driven, including increased severity of extreme
weather events, such as cyclones, hurricanes, or floods.

Chronic Risk
Chronic physical risks refer to longer-term shifts in climate patterns (e.g., sustained higher
temperatures) that may cause sea level rise or chronic heat waves.

2. Climate-Related Opportunities

Efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate change also produce opportunities for organizations, for
example, through resource efficiency and cost savings, the adoption of low-emission energy
sources, the development of new products and services, access to new markets, and building
resilience along the supply chain. Climate-related opportunities will vary depending on the region,
market, and industry in which an organization operates. The Task Force identified several areas of
opportunity as described below.

a. Resource Efficiency

There is growing evidence and examples of organizations that have successfully reduced
operating costs by improving efficiency across their production and distribution processes,
buildings, machinery/appliances, and transport/mobility—in particular in relation to energy
efficiency but also including broader materials, water, and waste management.” Such actions can

Best Practices and Case Studies for Industrial Energy Efficiency improvement
result in direct cost savings to organizations’ operations over the medium to long term and
contribute to the global efforts to curb emissions.“ Innovation in technology is assisting this
transition; such innovation includes developing efficient heating solutions and circular economy
solutions, making advances in LED lighting technology and industrial motor technology,
retrofitting buildings, employing geothermal power, offering water usage and treatment
solutions, and developing electric vehicles.

b. Energy Source

According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), to meet global emission-reduction goals,
countries will need to transition a major percentage of their energy generation to low emission
alternatives such as wind, solar, wave, tidal, hydro, geothermal, nuclear, biofuels, and carbon
capture and storage.” For the fifth year in a row, investments in renewable energy capacity have
exceeded investments in fossil fuel generation.’ The trend toward decentralized clean energy
sources, rapidly declining costs, improved storage capabilities, and subsequent global adoption of
these technologies are significant. Organizations that shift their energy usage toward low
emission energy sources could potentially save on annual energy costs.

c. Products and Services

Organizations that innovate and develop new low-emission products and services may improve
their competitive position and capitalize on shifting consumer and producer preferences. Some
examples include consumer goods and services that place greater emphasis on a product's
carbon footprint in its marketing and labeling (e.g., travel, food, beverage and consumer staples,
mobility, printing, fashion, and recycling services) and producer goods that place emphasis on
reducing emissions (e.8., adoption of energy-efficiency measures along the supply chain).

d. Markets

Organizations that pro-actively seek opportunities in new markets or types of assets may be able
to diversify their activities and better position themselves for the transition to a lower-carbon
economy. In particular, opportunities exist for organizations to access new markets through
collaborating with governments, development banks, small-scale local entrepreneurs, and
community groups in developed and developing countries as they work to shift to a lower-carbon
economy.” New opportunities can also be captured through underwriting or financing green
bonds and infrastructure (e.g., low-emission energy production, energy efficiency, grid
connectivity, or transport networks).

e. Resilience

The concept of climate resilience involves organizations developing adaptive capacity to respond
to climate change to better manage the associated risks and seize opportunities, including the
ability to respond to transition risks and physical risks. Opportunities include improving efficiency,
designing new production processes, and developing new products. Opportunities related to
resilience may be especially relevant for organizations with long-lived fixed assets or extensive
supply or distribution networks; those that depend critically on utility and infrastructure networks
or natural resources in their value chain; and those that may require longer-term financing and
investment.

Resource Efficiency Case Studies: Lower your Impact.

Global energy investment down 8% in 2015 with flows signaling move towards cleaner energy,
Global Trends in Renewable Energy
Investment 2017
Power Forward 3.0: How the largest US companies are capturing business value while addressing dimate change
G20 Green Finance Synthesis Report.
3. Financial Impacts

Better disclosure of the financial impacts of climate-related risks and opportunities on an
organization is a key goal of the Task Forces work. In order to make more informed financial
decisions, investors, lenders, and insurance underwriters need to understand how climate-related
risks and opportunities are likely to impact an organization's future financial position as reflected
in its income statement, cash flow statement, and balance sheet as outlined in Figure 1. While
climate change affects nearly all economic sectors, the level and type of exposure and the impact
of climate-related risks differs by sector, industry, geography, and organization.”

Figure 1
Climate-Related Risks, Opportunities, and Financial Impact

Transition Risks = Unit
Policy and Legal PROTANI = x
rats:
Technology
Energy Source

» HAS Opportunities Products/Services

Physical Risks Strategic Planning

faute Risk Management

E :
Climate-Related Risks,

Opportunities, and
Financial Impacts

     

PAU Moon CT LATE Te Assets & Liabilities
Expenditures EME SACHET SES Capital & Financing

Fundamentally, the financial impacts of climate-related issues on an organization are driven by
the specific climate-related risks and opportunities to which the organization is exposed and its
strategic and risk management decisions on managing those risks (i.e., mitigate, transfer, accept,
or control) and seizing those opportunities. The Task Force has identified four major categories,
described in Figure 2 (p. 9), through which climate-related risks and opportunities may affect an
organization's current and future financial positions.

The financial impacts of climate-related issues on organizations are not always clear or direct,
and, for many organizations, identifying the issues, assessing potential impacts, and ensuring
material issues are reflected in financial filings may be challenging. Key reasons for this are likely
because of (1) limited knowledge of climate-related issues within organizations; (2) the tendency
to focus mainly on near-term risks without paying adequate attention to risks that may arise in
the longer term; and (3) the difficulty in quantifying the financial effects of climate-related issues.”
To assist organizations in identifying climate-related issues and their impacts, the Task Force
developed Table 1 (p. 10), which provides examples of climate-related risks and their potential
financial impacts, and Table 2 (p. 11), which provides examples of climate-related opportunities
and their potential financial impacts. In addition, Section A.4 in the Annex provides more
information on the major categories of financial impacts—revenues, expenditures, assets and
liabilities, and capital and financing—that are likely to be most relevant for specific industries.

#7 SASB research demonstrates that 72 out of 79 Sustainable Industry Classification System (SICS") industries are significantly affected in some
way by climate-related risk.

31 World Business Council for Sustainable Development, “
January 18, 2017.

#

 

Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures 8
Figure 2

Major Categories of Financial Impact

Income Statement

OUT RE RECENSE CARE) EE
CEE ln RielMee IE: tee 0-0 IR (NPA NICE
SnerleReeRET- MAC een RIne Eee Re CITES
and identify potential opportunities for enhancing or
developing new revenues. In particular, given the
emergence and likely growth of carbon pricing as a
CE na Ten APTE Eee ER ENTRE ee Rec 1 RL el S
affected industries to consider the potential impacts
Oo ROVER CE LINE

Expenditures. An organization’s response to
climate-related risks and opportunities may depend,
UE tn RCE Enr eee SRI Re) CIE
cost suppliers may be more resilient to changes in

cost resulting from climate-related issues and more
flexible in their ability to address such issues. By

CETTE

Assets and Liabilities. Supply and demand
En Crea A ER) RC One (e 0;2 A
and market dynamics related to climate change
could affect the valuation of organizations’
assets and liabilities. Use of long-lived assets
and, where relevant, reserves may be
particularly affected by climate-related issues. It
is important for organizations to provide an
indication of the potential climate-related
impact on their assets and liabilities, particularly
long-lived assets. This should focus on existing
and committed future activities and decisions
UT A ele ea AT ELCS
downs, or impairment.

Capital and Financing. Climate-related risks

dan MCE Enr ER UE Tao EU TEE TR) and opportunities may change the profile of an
flexibility to adapt, organizations can better inform Cr CNP tee lol (ne IU IL AS APTE TEA (ETS
B ES CEE Le ete TNT EE Re ee CLAIR by increasing debt levels to compensate for
Climate-Related Risks, Itis also helpful for investors to understand capital ENT eReT CET RE EE QUE SO OCT ONE ||
Opportunities, and cie EN IL De Et Eee Et TT nel L'A TETE LL eue

Financial Impacts

nee ET EESTI Net Te]
plans should be considered bearing in mind

ÉAITS ARREIE E  Re Cole TRE Te RTE
debt, or reduce the tenor of borrowing available

dard organizations’ flexibility to shift capital and the ou ÉSUEENO ECOLE Eee .

Guidance Willingness of capital markets to fund organizations | Changes to capital and reserves from Open
exposed to significant levels of climate-related ECS EESEt write-downs, or the need to raise

D risks. Transparency of these plans may provide new equity to meet investment.

Scenario Analysis and greater access to capital markets or improved

Climate-Related Issues

LUE el N A TRES

 

E

Keylssues Consideredand The Task Force encourages organizations to undertake both historical and forward-looking

EL analyses when considering the potential financial impacts of climate change, with greater focus

E on forward-looking analyses as the efforts to mitigate and adapt to climate change are without

Condusion historical precedent. This is one of the reasons the Task Force believes scenario analysis is
important for organizations to consider incorporating into their strategic planning or risk

Appendices

management practices.

 

Recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures
Examples of Climate-Related Risks and Potential Financial Impacts

 

ate-Related Potential Financial Impacts

Policy and Legal

— Increased pricing of GHG — Increased operating costs (e.8., higher compliance costs,
emissions increased insurance premiums)

— Enhanced emissions-reporting — Write-offs, asset impairment, and early retirement of existing
obligations assets due to policy changes

— Mandates on and regulation of — Increased costs and/or reduced demand for products and
existing products and services services resulting from fines and judgments

— Exposure to litigation

 

Technology

— Substitution of existing products — Write-offs and early retirement of existing assets
and services with lower emissions _ Reduced demand for products and services
options

— Research and development (R&D) expenditures in new and

— Unsuccessful investment in new alternative technologies

technologies re |
— Capital investments in technology development

— Costs to transition to lower

emissions technology — Costs to adopt/deploy new practices and processes

 

Market
— Changing customer behavior — Reduced demand for goods and services due to shift in
— Uncertainty in market signals consumer preferences

— Increased production costs due to changing input prices (e.g.,
energy, water) and output requirements (e.g., waste treatment)

— Increased cost of raw materials

—  Abrupt and unexpected shifts in energy costs

— Change in revenue mix and sources, resulting in decreased
revenues

— Re-pricing of assets (e.g., fossil fuel reserves, land valuations,
securities valuations)

 

 

Reputation
— Shifts in consumer preferences — Reduced revenue from decreased demand for g0ods/services
— Stigmatization of sector — Reduced revenue from decreased production capacity (e.g.,
— increased stakeholder concern or delayed planning approvals, supply chain interruptions)
negative stakeholder feedback — Reduced revenue from negative impacts on workforce
management and planning (e.8., employee attraction and
retention)
— Reduction in capital availability
Acute — Reduced revenue from decreased production capacity (e.g.,

| transport difficulties, supply chain interruptions)
— Increased severity of extreme

weather events such as cyclones
and floods

— Reduced revenue and higher costs from negative impacts on
workforce (e.g., health, safety, absenteeism)

— Write-offs and early retirement of existing assets (e.g., damage

Chronic to property and assets in “high-risk”’ locations)

— Increased operating costs (e.8., inadequate water supply for

— Changes in precipitation patterns hydroelectric plants or to cool nuclear and fossil fuel plants)

and extreme variability in weather .
patterns — Increased capital costs (e.8., damage to facilities)

— Rising mean temperatures — Reduced revenues from lower sales/output

— Increased insurance premiums and potential for reduced

— Rising sea levels A9 ° ee un |
availability of insurance on assets in “high-risk” locations

 
Examples of Climate-Related Opportunities and Potential Financial Impacts

Type

Climate-Related Opportu

Potential Financial Impacts

 

Use of more efficient modes of
transport

Use of more efficient production
and distribution processes

Use of recycling
Move to more efficient buildings

Reduced water usage and
consumption

Reduced operating costs (e.g., through efficiency gains and
cost reductions)

increased production capacity, resulting in increased
revenues

increased value of fixed assets (e.8., highly rated energy-
efficient buildings)

Benefits to workforce management and planning (eg.
improved health and safety, employee satisfaction)
resulting in lower costs

 

Use of lower-emission sources of
energy

Use of supportive policy incentives
Use of new technologies
Participation in carbon market

Shift toward decentralized energy
generation

Reduced operational costs (e.g., through use of lowest cost
abatement)

Reduced exposure to future fossil fuel price increases

Reduced exposure to GHG emissions and therefore less
sensitivity to changes in cost of carbon

Returns on investment in low-emission technology

increased capital availability (e.8., as more investors favor
lower-emissions producers)

Reputational benefits resulting in increased demand for
goods/services

 

Development and/or expansion of
low emission goods and services

Development of climate adaptation
and insurance risk solutions

Development of new products or
services through R&D and
innovation

Ability to diversify business activities

Shift in consumer preferences

increased revenue through demand for lower emissions
products and services

increased revenue through new solutions to adaptation
needs (e.8., insurance risk transfer products and services)

Better competitive position to reflect shifting consumer
preferences, resulting in increased revenues

 

Access to new markets
Use of public-sector incentives

Access to new assets and locations
needing insurance coverage

increased revenues through access to new and emerging
markets (e.g., partnerships with governments,
development banks)

increased diversification of financial assets (e.g., green
bonds and infrastructure)

 

Participation in renewable energy
programs and adoption of energy-
efficiency measures

Resource substitutes/diversification

increased market valuation through resilience planning
(eg. infrastructure, land, buildings)

increased reliability of supply chain and ability to operate
under various conditions

increased revenue through new products and services
related to ensuring resiliency

 
